References:
Spatial Networks
Marc Barth´elemy∗
Institut de Physique Th´eorique, CEA, IPhT CNRS, URA 2306 F-91191 Gif-sur-Yvette France and
Centre d’Analyse et de Math´ematique Sociales (CAMS, UMR 8557 CNRS-EHESS)
Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales, 54 bd. Raspail, F-75270 Paris Cedex 06, France.
Complex systems are very often organized under the form of networks where nodes and edges
areembeddedinspace. Transportationandmobilitynetworks,Internet,mobilephonenetworks,
powergrids,socialandcontactnetworks,neuralnetworks,areallexampleswherespaceisrelevant
andwheretopologyalonedoesnotcontainalltheinformation. Characterizingandunderstanding
thestructureandtheevolutionofspatialnetworksisthuscrucialformanydifferentfieldsranging
from urbanism to epidemiology. An important consequence of space on networks is that there
is a cost associated to the length of edges which in turn has dramatic effects on the topological
structure of these networks. We will expose thoroughly the current state of our understanding
of how the spatial constraints affect the structure and properties of these networks. We will
reviewthemostrecentempiricalobservationsandthemostimportantmodelsofspatialnetworks.
We will also discuss various processes which take place on these spatial networks, such as phase
transitions,randomwalks,synchronization,navigation,resilience,anddiseasespread.
Contents 1. Erdos-Renyigraph 39
2. PlanarErdos-Renyigraph 39
I. Networks and space 2 3. Thehiddenvariablemodelforspatialnetworks 40
A. Introduction 2 4. TheWaxmanmodel 41
B. Quantitativegeographyandnetworks 2 C. Spatialsmallworlds 41
C. Whatthisreviewis(not)about 2 1. TheWatts-Strogatzmodel 41
2. Spatialgeneralizations 42
II. Characterizing spatial networks 3 D. Spatialgrowthmodels 43
A. Generalitiesonplanarnetworks 3 1. Generalities 43
1. Spatialandplanarnetworks 3 2. Preferentialattachmentanddistanceselection 43
2. Classicalresultsforplanarnetworks 3 3. Growthandlocaloptimization 46
3. Voronoitessellation 4 E. Optimalnetworks 49
B. Mixingspaceandtopology 5 1. Hub-and-spokestructure 50
1. Basicmeasures 5 2. Congestionandcentralizedorganization 51
2. Mixingtopologyandspace 8 3. FromtheMSTtotheSPT 53
3. Communitydetection. Motifs 10 4. Addingtwoantagonisticquantities 55
5. Beyondtrees: noiseandloops 58
III. Empirical observations 11 F. Summary: Effectofspaceonnetworks 59
A. Transportationnetworks 11
1. Representations 11 V. Processes on spatial networks 59
2. Airlinenetworks 11 A. Isingmodel 59
3. Bus,subway,railway,andcommuters 14 1. GeneralitiesontheIsingmodelonlattices 60
4. Cargo-ship 16 2. Isingmodelonsmall-worldnetworks 60
B. Infrastructurenetworks 18 3. Criticalfluctuations 61
1. Roadandstreetnetworks 18 B. Randomwalksinspatialnetworks 61
2. Powergridsandwaterdistributionnetworks 21 1. Quantifyingtheeffectofshortcuts 61
3. TheInternet 22 2. DiffusiononpowerlawWatts-Strogatznetworks 63
4. Geographyinsocialnetworks 23 C. Synchronization 64
C. Origin-destinationmatrixandmobilitynetworks 24 D. Navigatingandsearching 64
1. Importanceofhumanmobility 24 1. Searchablenetworks 64
2. Distributionofthetripdurationandlength 24 2. SketchofKleinberg’sproof 65
3. Thegravitylaw 26 3. Searchinginspatialscale-freenetworks 67
D. Neuralnetworks 31 4. Navigabilityandmetricspace 67
E. Summary: Existenceofgeneralfeatures 32 5. Effectofcost 68
6. Routinginsocialnetworks 68
IV. Models of spatial networks 34 E. Effectofspaceonrobustnessandresilience 69
A. Geometricgraphs 34 1. Percolationandsmall-worlds 69
1. Thesimplestrandomgeometricgraph 34 2. Cascadeoffailuresininfrastructures 71
2. Randomgeometricgraphinhyperbolicspace 37 3. Failureofinterdependentnetworks 71
3. Ascale-freenetworkonalattice 38 F. Spaceandthespreadofdisease 72
4. Apolloniannetworks 38 1. SIRonlatticesandsmall-worldnetworks 72
B. SpatialgeneralizationoftheErdos-Renyigraph 39 2. FromEuclidianspacetonetworks 75
3. WIFIandBluetoothepidemiology 76
VI. Summary and outlook 77
∗Electronicaddress: marc.barthelemy@cea.fr References 78
0102
voN
4
]hcem-tats.tam-dnoc[
2v2030.0101:viXra
78
• Connection with socio-economical indicators. Data References
on spatial networks and in particular, road and
otherinfrastructurenetworksarenowavailableand [1] A. Aasa, O. Jarv, E. Saluveer, S. Slim, and R. Ahas.
thesenetworkshavebeenthesubjectofmanystud- Methodology of determination of the anchor points
ies. Also, with the emergence of geosocial appli- based on passive mobile positioning database. Social
positioning method, 2008.
cations on mobile phones for example we can ex-
[2] L.A.Adamic,R.M.Lukose,A.R.Puniyani,andB.A.
pect interesting studies connecting spatial distri-
Huberman. Search in power-law networks. Phys. Rev.
butions and social behavior. This line of research
E, 64:046135, 2001.
already appeared in recent studies which tried to
[3] R. Ahas, U. Mark, A. Aasa, and H. Kalle. Mapping
relatetopologicalstructuresofnetworkswithsocio-
humanbehaviorintallinn. InTallinn.Delft: TUDelft,
economical indicators. In these studies, an im- 2001.
portantquestionconcernsthecorrelationsbetween [4] R.K. Ahuja, T.L. Magnanti, and J.B. Orlin. Network
topological quantities and social factors. For ex- flows. Prentice Hall, New Jersey, 1993.
ample, it would be interesting to know if we can [5] K. Bhattacharyaa A.K. Nandia and S.S. Manna. Opti-
understandsomeaspectsofthespatialdistribution mal network for passenger traffic. Physica A, 388:3651
of crime rates in terms of topological indicators of – 3656, 2009.
[6] I.F.Akyildiz,S.Weilian,Y.Sankarasubramaniam,and
theroadnetwork(suchasthebetweennesscentral-
E. Cayirci. A survey on sensor networks. Communica-
ity for example).
tions Magazine, IEEE, 40:102 – 114, 2002.
[7] R. Albert and A.-L. Barabasi. Statistical mechanics of
• Evolution of transportation (and spatial) networks. complex networks. Rev. Mod. Phys., 74:47 – 97, 2002.
Howtransportationnetworksevolveisanoldprob- [8] R. Albert, H. Jeong, and A.-L. Barabasi. Diameter of
lemandwasalreadythesubjectofmanystudiesin the world wide web. Nature, 401:130 – 131, 1999.
[9] R. Albert, I. Albert, and G. L. Nakarado. Structural
the 1970s (see for example [150]). However, apart
vulnerability of the north american power grid. Phys.
from some exceptions (see for example [214] and
Rev. E, 69:025103, 2004.
referencestherein)thisproblemisstillnotverywell
[10] D.J. Aldous. Optimal spatial transportation networks
understood. Wearenowinthepositionwheredata
where link-costs are sublinear in link-capacity. J. Stat.
and tools are available and we can expect some in- Mech., 2008:P03006, 2008.
teresting developments in this area. In parallel to [11] D.J. Aldous. Spatial transportation networks with
empirical studies, we also need to develop theoret- transfer costs: asymptotic optimality of hub and spoke
ical ideas and models in order to describe the evo- models. In Mathematical Proceedings of the Cambridge
lution of spatial networks. Philosophical Society,pages471–487.CambridgeUni-
versity Press, 2008.
[12] D.J. Aldous and J. Shunn. Connected spatial networks
• Urban studies. More generally, infrastructure and over random points and a route-length statistic. arXiv,
transportation networks are part of urban systems page 1003.3700, 2010.
and we believe that the current understanding of [13] E.Almaas,R.V.Kulkarni,andD.Stroud.Scalingprop-
spatial networks could help in understanding the erties of random walks on small-world networks. Phys.
structureandevolutionofthesesystems. Inpartic- Rev. E, 68:056105, 2003.
ular, our knowledge of spatial networks could help [14] L. A. N. Amaral, A. Scala, M. Barth´elemy, and H. E.
Stanley. Classes of small-world networks. Proc. Natl.
in the understanding of important phenomenon
Acad. Sci. USA, 97:11149–11152, 2000.
such as urban sprawl and in the design of sustain-
[15] J. Ambjorn, B. Durhuss, and T. Jonsson. Quantum
able cities.
geometry.Astatisticalfieldtheoryapproach.Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1997.
[16] J.E. Anderson. Theoretical foundation for the gravity
equation. American Economic Review, 69:106 – 116,
Acknowledgments
1979.
I am indebted to A. Banos, A. Barrat, M. Batty, [17] R. M. Anderson and R. M. May. Infectious Diseases
H. Berestycki, M. Boguna, S. Boettcher, P. Bonnin, P. of Humans: Dynamics and Control. Oxford University
Bordin, J. Bouttier, V. Blondel, M. Brede, A. Chessa, Press, Oxford, 1992.
V. Colizza, T. Courtat, L. Dall’Asta, C.-N. Douady, S. [18] A.Arenas,A.Diaz-Guilera,J.Kurths,Y.Moreno,and
Douady,Y.Duan,J.-P.Frey,S.Fortunato,A.Flammini, C.Zhou. Synchronizationincomplexnetworks. Physics
M. Gastner, C. Godr`eche, E. Guitter, D. Helbing, H.J. Reports, 469:93 – 153, 2008.
[19] D.J. Ashton, T.C. Jarrett, and N.F. Johnson. Effect
Herrmann,S.Havlin,B.Jiang,S.M.Kang,D.Krioukov,
of congestion costs on shortest paths through complex
R. Lambiotte, M. Latapy, V. Latora, D. Levinson, J.-M.
networks. Phys. Rev. Lett., 94:058701, 2005.
Luck, J.-P. Nadal, S. Porta, C. Roth, G. Santoboni, A.
[20] D.M.Auto,A.A.Moreira,H.J.Herrmann,andJ.S.An-
Scala,P.Sen,E.Strano,F.Tarissan,P.Thiran,C.Uzan,
drade Jr. Finite-size effects for percolation on appollo-
A. Vespignani, Z. Zhang, R.M. Ziff, for discussions and
nian networks. Phys. Rev. E, 78:066112, 2008.
for giving useful suggestions and advices to improve this [21] L. Backstrom, E. Sun, and C. Marlow. Find me if you
manuscript at various stages.

Annexes/Appendices:

Body Text:
2
I. NETWORKS AND SPACE B. Quantitative geography and networks
Spatial networks were actually the subject a long time
A. Introduction
ago of many studies in quantitative geography. Objects
of studies in geography are locations, activities, flows
Networks (or graphs) were for a long time the subject of individuals and goods, and already in the 1970s the
ofmanystudiesinmathematics,mathematicalsociology, scientists working in quantitative geography focused on
computer science and in quantitative geography. In the networks evolving in time and space. One can consult
case of random networks, the first and most important for example books such as the remarkably modern ‘Net-
model was proposed by Erdos and Renyi [122, 123] at works analysis in Geography’ by Haggett and Chorley
theendofthe1950sandwasatthebasisofmoststudies (published in 1969 [150]) or ‘Models in Geography’ [81]
until recently. The interest in networks was however re- to realize that many modern questions in the complex
newedin1998byWattsandStrogatz[313]whoextracted system field are actually at least 40 years old. In these
stylized facts from real-world networks and proposed a books, the authors discuss the importance of space in
simple,newmodelofrandomnetworks. Thisrenewalin- the formation and evolution of networks. They develop
terestwasreinforcedafterthepublication,ayearlater,of tools to characterize spatial networks and discuss possi-
anarticlebyAlbertandBarabasi[27]ontheexistenceof ble models. Maybe what was lacking at that time, were
strong degree heterogeneities. Strong heterogeneities are datasets of large networks and larger computer capabil-
in sharp contrast with the random graphs considered so ities, but a lot of interesting thoughts can be found in
far and the existence of strong fluctuations in real-world theseearlystudies. Mostoftheimportantproblemssuch
networks triggered a wealth of studies. A decade later, as the location of nodes of a network, the evolution of
we can now find many books [32, 70, 87, 114, 245, 255] transportation networks and their interaction with pop-
andreviewsonthissubject[7,54,113,244]. Thesebooks ulationandactivitydensityareaddressedintheseearlier
and reviews discuss usually very quickly spatial aspects studies, but many important points still remain unclear
of networks. However, for many critical infrastructures, and will certainly benefit from the current knowledge on
communication or biological networks, space is relevant: networks and complex systems. Advances in complex
mostofthepeoplehavetheirfriendsandrelativesintheir networks already helped researchers to gain new insights
neighborhood, power grids and transportation networks on these difficult problems (see for example the recent
dependobviouslyondistance,manycommunicationnet- Handbook on Theoretical and Quantitative Geography
work devices have short radio range, the length of axons [44])andthepresentreviewisanattempttocollectmod-
in a brain has a cost, and the spread of contagious dis- ernresultsonnetworksandtohelpresearchersinvarious
eases is not uniform across territories. In particular, in fields to reach quantitative answers and realistic model-
the important case of the brain, regions that are spa- ing. In geography and urban studies, it would be about
tially closer have a larger probability of being connected understanding the evolution of transportation networks,
than remote regions as longer axons are more costly in thehumanmobility,thespatialstructureofurbanareas,
terms of material and energy [68]. Wiring costs depend- etc. and how these different factors are entangled with
ing on distance is thus certainly an important aspect of each other, in order to propose an integrated approach
brain networks and we can probably expect spatial net- ofscale, mobility, andspatialdistributionofactivitiesat
works to be very relevant in this rapidly evolving topic. various scales.
Another particularly important example of such a spa-
tial network is the Internet which is defined as the set
ofrouterslinkedbyphysicalcableswithdifferentlengths
C. What this review is (not) about
and latency times. More generally, the distance could
beanotherparametersuchasasocialdistancemeasured
The importance of spatial networks in current prob-
by salary, socio-professional category differences, or any
lems, together with the lack of a review specific on this
quantitywhichmeasuresthecostassociatedwiththefor-
topic brought us to propose the present review article.
mation of a link.
We will first review the tools to characterize these net-
All these examples show that these networks have works and the empirical properties of some important
nodesandedgeswhichareconstrainedbysomegeometry spatial networks. We then review the most important
andareusuallyembeddedinatwo-orthree-dimensional models of spatial network formation which allows to un-
space and this has important effects on their topologi- derstandthemaineffectsofthespatialconstraintsonthe
cal properties and consequently on processes which take networkproperties. Wewillalsodiscusshowspaceaffect
place on them. If there is a cost associated to the edge various processes taking place on these networks such as
length, longer links must be compensated by some ad- walking and searching, resilience, or disease spread.
vantage such as for example being connected to a well- As mentioned above, spatial networks appear in many
connectednode—thatis,ahub. Thetopologicalaspects different fields and we will try to cover in some detail
ofthenetworkarethencorrelatedtospatialaspectssuch the studies in these various areas. However, it is obvi-
as the location of the nodes and the length of edges. ously impossible to review all the existing results related
3
to spatial networks. This implies to make some choices onspatialnetworksinsectionV.Inparticular,wewillre-
and we basically restricted ourselves to (i) recent topics, viewtheeffectsofspaceontransitionsintheIsingmodel
(ii) with a sufficient body of literature, (iii) of funda- (V.A), random walks (V.B), navigation and searching
mental research, and (iv) with preferably applications to (V.D), robustness (V.E), and disease spread (V.F).
real-world systems. The goal is to summarize what we In the last section (VI), we propose a summary of the
understandatthispointabouttheeffectofspaceinnet- review about the effect of space on networks and we end
works. In particular, we decided not to discuss here the thediscussionwithalistofopenproblemsthatwebelieve
following subjects (which is not an exhaustive list). are interesting directions for future research.
River networks. Rivers form spatial networks (which
in most cases are essentially trees), and result from the
interplay between gravity and the elevation distribution. II. CHARACTERIZING SPATIAL NETWORKS
These networks were the subject of many studies and
we refer the interested reader to the books [70, 269] and A. Generalities on planar networks
references therein for a recent account on this subject.
Sensor, ad hoc, and wireless networks. There is of 1. Spatial and planar networks
course a huge literature on these subjects and which is
Loosely speaking, spatial networks are networks for
mostly found in computer and engineering science. In
which the nodes are located in a space equipped with a
this review, we will discuss some theoretical aspects of
metric. For most practical applications, the space is the
these problems and for more applied problems we re-
two-dimensional space and the metric is the usual eu-
fer the interested reader to more specialized reviews and
clidean distance. This definition implies in general that
books such as [6].
the probability of finding a link between two nodes will
Spatial games. Game theory was recently applied to
decrease with the distance. However, it does not imply
situations where agents are located on the nodes of a
that a spatial network is planar. Indeed, the airline pas-
networks. Werefertheinterestedreaderinthisparticular
senger networks is a network connecting through direct
field to the articles [153, 251] for example.
flights the airports in the world, but is not a planar net-
Mathematical studies of planar maps. Planar graphs
work.
and maps [301] are combinatorial objects which are the
With this definition of a spatial network links are not
objectofmanystudiesinmathematicsandalsoinphysics
necessarily embedded in space: social networks for ex-
where they appear as a natural discretization of random
ample connect individuals through friendship relations.
surfaces used in two-dimensional quantum gravity. In
In this case, space intervenes in the fact that the con-
particular these mathematical methods allow to under-
nection probability between two individuals usually de-
standthecriticalbehavioroftheIsingmodelonarandom
creases with the distance between them.
planar lattice [59]. We refer the interested reader to the
Formanyinfrastructurenetworkshowever,planarityis
classical book of Ambjorn, Durhuus and Jonsson [15].
unavoidable. Roads, rail, and other transportation net-
The detailed outline of the review is the following. In works are spatial and to a good accuracy planar net-
the chapter II, we introduce the main tools to character- works. For many applications, planar spatial networks
ize spatial networks. Many spatial networks are planar arethemostimportantandmoststudieshavefocusedon
and we recall the main results on planar networks and these examples. In this section, we will thus recall some
how to characterize them in section II.A. In addition, basic results about planar networks and we then recall
since spatial networks mix space and topology, we need the standard tools for characterizing networks. In par-
specific tools to characterize them that we describe in ticular, we will focus on the not-so-standard tools which
section II.B. canhelpincharacterizingspatialnetworks,mixingtopo-
In section III, we review the properties of real- logical and metric features.
world spatial networks such as transportation networks
(III.A), infrastructure networks (III.B), mobility net-
works (III.C), and neural networks (III.D). In these sec- 2. Classical results for planar networks
tions, we insist on salient stylized facts which allow us
to draw some general features of real-world networks in Basic results on planar networks can be found in any
section III.E. graphtheorytextbook(seeforexample[85])andwewill
In section IV, we review the most important mod- very briefly recall the most important ones.
els of spatial networks. We divide these models in Basically, aplanargraphisagraphthatcanbedrawn
five large categories: we start with random geometric intheplaneinsuchawaythatitsedgesdonotintersect.
graphs (IV.A), followed by spatial generalizations of the Notalldrawingsofplanargraphsarewithoutintersection
Erdos-Renyigraph(IV.B)andtheWatts-Strogatzmodel and a drawing without intersection is sometimes called
(IV.C). We then review models of growing spatial net- a plane graph or a planar embedding of the graph. In
works in section IV.D and we end this chapter with op- real-worldcases,theseconsiderationsactuallydonotap-
timal networks IV.E. ply since the nodes and the edges represent in general
Finally, we discuss various processes which take place physical objects.
4
In general it is not a trivial thing to check if a graph bounds E =3N −6 and F =2N −5, respectively.
is planar and the Kuratowski theorem (see for example Planarsetsthusformfacesorcellswhichhaveacertain
the textbook [85]) states that a finite graph is planar if shape. Incertainconditions,itcanbeinterestingtochar-
andonlyifitdoesnotcontainasubgraphthatishomeo- acterize statistically these shapes and various indicators
morphictothegraphsK orK showninFig.1. Many were developed in this perspective (see [150] for a list of
5 3,3
these indicators). In particular, if A is the area of a cell,
and L the major axis, the form ratio is defined as A/L2
√
or equivalently the elongation ratio given by A/L. In
the paper [206] on the road network structure, L¨ammer
et al. use another definition of the form factor of a cell
and define it as
4A
φ= (3)
πD2
where πD2 is the area of the circumscribed circle.
3. Voronoi tessellation
FIG. 1 Complete graphs K and K .
5 3,3
A tessellation or tiling of the plane is a collection of
algorithmsweredevelopedtotesttheplanarityofagiven plane figures that fills the plane with no overlaps and
network (see for example [180]) and most of these meth- no gaps. One may also speak of tessellations of parts of
ods operate in O(N) time. the plane or of other surfaces (generalizations to higher
dimensions are also possible). A Voronoi diagram is de-
There are some very general facts that can be demon-
terminedbydistancestoaspecifieddiscretesetofpoints
strated for planar graphs, and among them Euler’s for-
(seeforexamplethefigure2). EachsitehasaVoronoicell
mula is probably the best known. Euler showed that a
V(s)consistingofallpointsclosertosthantoanyother
finite connected planar graph satisfies the following for-
site. The segments of the Voronoi diagram are all the
mula
points in the plane that are equidistant to the two near-
N −E+F =2 (1) est sites. The Voronoi nodes are the points equidistant
tothree(ormore)sitesandunlesssomedegeneracies,all
whereN isthenumberofnodes, E thenumberofedges, nodes of the Voronoi tessellation have a degree equal to
andF isthenumberoffaces. Thisformulacanbeeasily three. ThedualgraphforaVoronoidiagramcorresponds
proved by induction by noting that removing an edge to the Delaunay triangulation for the same set of points.
decreases F and E by one, leaving N −E+F invariant. Voronoi tessellations are interesting for spatial net-
Wecanrepeatthisoperationuntilwegetatreeforwhich worksinthesensethattheyprovideanaturalnullmodel
F =1 and N =E+1 leading to N −E+F =E+1− to which one can compare a real world network.
E+1=2.
Moreoverforanyfiniteconnectedplanargraphwecan
obtain a bound. Indeed, any face is bounded by at least
three edges and every edge separates two faces at most
which implies that E ≥ 3F/2. From Euler’s formula we
then obtain
E ≤3N −6 (2)
In other words, planar graphs are always sparse with a
bounded average degree (cid:104)k(cid:105)≤6.
We note here that if we start from a planar point
set, we can construct various planar graph by connect-
ing these points (see the next section on tessellations for
example) and by definition the maximal planar graph is FIG.2 ExampleoftheVoronoitessellationonasetofpoints.
the triangulation of a planar point set such that the ad- From [160].
dition of any edge results in a non-planar graph. Such a
network is useful for example to assess the efficiency of In particular, an important case is obtained when the
a real-world planar network and provides an interesting points are distributed uniformly and independently in
null model. For such a maximal planar graph the num- the plane. In this case, one can speak of a Poisson-
ber of edges and faces are maximal and are equal to the Voronoi tessellation for which some statistical properties
5
are known (see [158–160] for a short review on this sub- represents the number of roads which intersect a given
ject). In particular, the probability that a point has a road. Also, the shortest path length in this network rep-
n-sided Voronoi cell is given for large n by [158, 159] resents the number of different roads one has to take to
go from one point to another. Finally, we note that even
C (8π2)n (cid:20) (cid:18) 1 (cid:19)(cid:21) if the road network has a peaked degree distribution its
p = 1+O √ (4)
n 4π2 (2n)! n dualrepresentationcandisplaybroaddistributions[184].
which at the dominant order behaves as p ≈n−2n.
n
b. Clustering, assortativity, and average shortest path.
Complex networks are essentially characterized by a
B. Mixing space and topology
small set of parameters which are not all relevant for
spatial networks. For example, the degree distribution
1. Basic measures
which has been the main subject of interest in complex
network studies is usually peaked for planar networks,
a. Adjacency matrix, dual graph. A graph with N nodes
due to the spatial constraints. However, the clustering
and E edges can be described by its N ×N adjacency
coefficient as we will see is important in the characteri-
matrix A which is defined as
zation of spatial networks. For a node i of degree k it is
i
(cid:40) defined as
=1 if i and j are connected
A = (5)
ij =0 otherwise C(i)= E i (8)
k (k −1)/2
i i
IfthegraphisundirectedthenthematrixAissymmetric.
The degree of a node is the number of its neighbors and where E i is the number of edges among the neighbors
is then given by of i. This quantity gives some information about local
clustering and is the object of many studies in complex
k =(cid:88) A (6) networks. It is also a quantity of interest for spatial net-
i ij
works. IndeedforErdos-Renyi(ER)randomgraphs(see
j
sectionIV.B)withfiniteaveragedegree,theaverageclus-
Thefirstsimpleindicatorofagraphistheaveragedegree tering coefficient is simply given by
(cid:88) 1
(cid:104)k(cid:105)=1/N k i =2E/N (7) (cid:104)C(cid:105)∼ (9)
N
i
where the brackets (cid:104)·(cid:105) denote the average over the net-
where here and in the following the brackets (cid:104)·(cid:105) denote
work. Incontrast,forspatialnetworks,losernodeshavea
the average over the nodes of the network. In particular
largerprobabilitytobeconnected,leadingtoalargeclus-
thescalingof(cid:104)k(cid:105)withN indicatesifthenetworkissparse
tering coefficient. The variation of this clustering coeffi-
(which is the case when (cid:104)k(cid:105)→const. for n→∞).
cient in space can thus bring valuable information about
ThedistributionofdegreeP(k)isusuallyaquantityof
the spatial structure of the network under consideration.
interestandcandisplaylargeheterogeneitiessuchasitis
observed in scale-free networks (see for example [7]). We Theclusteringcoefficientdependsonthenumberoftri-
indeed observe that for spatial networks such as airline angles or cycles of length 3 and can also be computed by
networks or the Internet the degrees are very heteroge- using the adjacency matrix A. Powers of the adjacency
neous (see III). However, when physical constraints are matrix give the number of paths of variable length. For
strong or when the cost associated with the creation of instancethequantity 61Tr(A3)isthenumberC 3 ofcycles
new links is large, a cut-off appears in the degree distri- of length tree and is related to the clustering coefficient.
bution[14]andinsomecasethedistributioncanbevery Analogously we can define and count cycles of various
peaked. This is the case for the road network for exam- lengths(seeforexample[50,272]andreferencestherein)
pleandmoregenerallyinthecaseofplanarnetworksfor and compare this number to the ones obtained on null
which the degree distribution P(k) is of little interest. models (lattices, triangulations, etc).
In some real-world cases such as the road network for Finally, many studies define the clustering coefficient
example, it is natural to study the usual (or ‘primal’) per degree classes which is given by
representation where the nodes are the intersections and
1 (cid:88)
the links represent the road segment between the inter- C(k)= C(i) (10)
N(k)
section. However another representation, the dual graph
i/ki=k
can be of interest (see [260]. In this road network exam-
ple, the dual graph is constructed in the following way: The behavior of C(k) versus k thus gives an indication
the nodes are the roads and two nodes are connected if howtheclusteringisorganizedwhenweexploredifferent
thereexistanintersectionbetweenthetwocorresponding classes of degrees. However, in order to be useful, this
roads. Onecanthenmeasurethedegreeofanodewhich quantity needs to be applied to networks with a large
6
range of degree variations which is usually not the case The effect of space could thus in principle be detected
in spatial networks. in the behavior of (cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105)(N). It should however be noted
that if the number of nodes is too small this can be a
Ingeneralthedegreesatthetwoendnodesofalinkare
tricky task. In the case of brain networks for example, a
correlated and to describe these degree correlations one
behavior typical of a three-dimensional network in N1/3
needs the two-point correlation function P(k(cid:48)|k). This
could easily be confused with a logarithmic behavior if
quantityrepresentstheprobabilitythatanyedgestarting
N is not large enough.
at a vertex of degree k ends at a vertex of degree k(cid:48).
Higher order correlation functions can be defined and
we refer the interested reader to [32] for example. The
function P(k(cid:48)|k) is however not easy to handle and one c. Spectralgraphtheory. Spectralgraphtheoryisanim-
can define the assortativity [256, 303] portantbranchofmathematicsandallowstogetinsights
aboutthe structure of agraph with quantitiescomputed
(cid:88)
k (k)= P(k(cid:48)|k)k(cid:48) (11) fromtheeigenvaluesofthegraphLaplacian[83]. Forex-
nn
k(cid:48) ample,theso-calledalgebraicconnectivityisthesmallest
non-zeroeigenvalue, thedistributionofcyclelengthscan
A similar quantity can be defined for each node as the
be computed using a moment expansion of the eigenval-
average degree of the neighbor
ues, the stationary state of a random walk and synchro-
nizationpropertiesaregovernedbythelargesteigenvalue
1 (cid:88)
k (i)= k (12) of the adjacency matrix. In a nutshell, spectral graph
nn k j
i theorythusstudiestheadjacencymatricesofgraphsand
j∈Γ(i)
connect their eigenvalues to other properties. There are
There are essentially two classes of behaviors for the as- different conventions but essentially one is interested in
sortativity. If k nn(k) is an increasing function of k, ver- the discrete Laplacian on the network defined by
tices with large degrees have a larger probability to con-
nect to similar nodes with a large degree. In this case, L=D−A (17)
we speak of an assortative network and in the opposite
case of a disassortative network. It is expected in gen- whereD ij =k iδ ij istheidentitymatrixtimesthedegree
eral that social networks are mostly assortative, while k i of node i and A is the adjacency matrix of the graph.
technological networks are disassortative. However for IfthegraphisundirectedtheLaplacianissymmetricand
spatial networks we will see (see section III) that spatial ifthegraphisaninfinitesquarelatticegridofspacinga,
constraints usually implies a flat function k (k). thisdefinitionoftheLaplaciancoincideswiththecontin-
nn
uous Laplacian ∇2 when a→0. We list here some basic
Usually, there are many paths between two nodes in
properties of the Laplacian and we refer the interested
a connected networks and if we keep the shortest one it
reader to more advanced material such as the book [83].
defines a distance on the network
• Intheundirectedcase,Lissymmetricandhasreal
(cid:96)(i,j)= min |path| (13)
paths(i→j) positive eigenvalues λ 0 = 0 ≤ λ 1 ≤ ··· ≤ λ N.
The multiplicity of λ = 0 (whose eigenvector has
0
wherethelength|path|ofthepathisdefinedasitsnum- all components equal) is equal to the number of
berofedges. Thediameterofthegraphcanbedefinedas connected components of the graph.
themaximumvalueofall(cid:96)(i,j)orcanalsobeestimated
by the average this distance over all pairs of nodes in or- • Theeigenvalueλ iscalledthealgebraicconnectiv-
1
dertocharacterizethe‘size’ofthenetwork. Indeedfora ity[128]andplaysanimportantroleinthecharac-
d-dimensional regular lattice with N nodes, this average terization of the graph and, roughly speaking, the
shortest path (cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105) scales as larger λ , the more connected the graph.
1
(cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105)∼N1/d (14) • The distribution of eigenvalues is important in
many applications. For instance for random walks,
In a small-world network (see [313] and section IV.C)
it is related to the return probability and it can
constructed over a d−dimensional lattice (cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105) has a very
also be used (together with the eigenvectors) for
different behavior
visual representations of graphs known as spectral
embeddings(seeforexample[219]). Anotherexam-
(cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105)∼logN (15)
pleconcernsthesynchronizationoflinearlycoupled
The crossover from a large-world behavior N1/d to a identical oscillators where a master stability func-
tion relates the stability of synchronized solutions
small-world one with logN can be achieved for a den-
to the eigenvalues of the Laplacian (more precisely
sity p of long links (or ‘shortcuts’) [36] such that
totheratioλ /λ ,see[257]and[23]forthesmall-
N 1
pN ∼1 (16) world case).
7
d. Betweenness centrality. The importance of a node is raphy, this consideration does not apply anymore and if
characterized by its so-called centrality. There are how- we rewire more and more links (as illustrated in Fig. 3b)
ever many different centrality indicators such as the de- we observe a progressive decorrelation of centrality and
gree, the closeness, etc., but we will focus here on the space while the correlation with degree increases. In a
betweenness centrality g(i) which is defined as [34, 35, lattice,thebetweennesscentralitydependsessentiallyon
131, 138, 243]. space and is maximum at the barycenter, while in a net-
workthebetweennesscentralityofanodedependsonits
g(i)=(cid:88)σ st(i)
(18)
degree. When the network is constituted of long links
σ superimposed on a lattice, we expect the appearance of
st
s(cid:54)=t
‘anomalies’ characterized by large deviations around the
whereσ isthenumberofshortestpathsgoingfromsto behavior g ∼ kη. In order to characterize quantitatively
st
t and σ (i) is the number of shortest paths going from s theseanomalies[31],onecancomputethefluctuationsof
st
to t through the node i. This quantity g(i) thus charac- thebetweennesscentrality∆ MR(k)forarandomizednet-
terizes the importance of the node i in the organization work withthesame degreedistributionthan theoriginal
of flows in the network. Note that with this definition, networkandconstructedwiththeMolloy-Reedalgorithm
thebetweennesscentralityofterminalnodesiszero. The [234]. We can then consider a node i to be anomalous
betweenness centrality can similarly be defined for edges if its betweenness centrality g(i) lies outside the interval
[(cid:104)g(k)(cid:105)−ν∆ (k),(cid:104)g(k)(cid:105)+ν∆ (k)] where the value
MR MR
g(e)=
(cid:88) σ st(e)
(19)
of ν determines the confidence interval. For ν ≈ 1.952,
σ the considered interval represents 95% of the nodes in
st
e∈E the case of Gaussian distributed centralities around the
average.
where σ (e) is the number of shortest paths going from
st
The effect of shortcuts and the appearance of anoma-
s to t and going through the edge e.
lies can already be observed in the simple case of a one-
Thebetweennesscentralityofavertexisdeterminedby
dimensional lattice i = 1,...,N. The betweenness cen-
itsabilitytoprovideapathbetweenseparatedregionsof
trality in this case is given by g (i)=(i−1)(N−i) with
the network. Hubs are natural crossroads for paths and 0
a maximum at i = N/2 (see Fig. 4). When one link is
itisnaturaltoobserveamarkedcorrelationbetweenthe
(cid:80)
average g(k)= g(i)/N(k) and k as expressed in
i/ki=k
the following relation [35]
g(k)∼kη (20)
where η depends on the characteristics of the network.
We expect this relation to be altered when spatial con-
straints become important and in order to understand
this effect we consider a one-dimensional lattice which
is the simplest case of a spatially ordered network. For
this lattice the shortest path between two nodes is sim-
ply the euclidean geodesic and for two points lying far
from each other, the probability that the shortest path
passesnearthebarycenterofthenetworkisverylarge. In
otherwords,thebarycenter(anditsneighbors)willhave FIG. 4 Example of how the addition of a link perturbs the
a large centrality as illustrated in Fig. 3a. In contrast, centrality. In black, the betweenness centrality for the 1d
lattice (of size (N = 100) has a maximum at the barycenter
N/2 = 50. The addition of a link between a = 20 and b =
30 decreases the betweenness centrality between a and b and
increases the betweenness centrality of nodes a and b.
addedbetweennodesaandb,thebetweennesscentrality
of the nodes in the interval ]a,b[ decreases. For example,
if a<N/2<b it is not difficult to see that the variation
of the centrality of the node N/2 is bounded by
FIG. 3 (a) Betweenness centrality for the (one-dimensional) δg(N/2)<−a(N −b) (21)
lattice case. The central nodes are close to the barycenter.
(b) For a general graph, the central nodes are usually the which basically means that the shortest paths from a
ones with large degree. nodei∈[1,a]toanodej ∈[b,N]followtheshortcutand
avoid the node N/2. In contrast, the betweenness cen-
inapurelytopologicalnetworkwithnounderlyinggeog- trality of the contact points increases and the between-
8
nesscentralityofnodeaisnowg(a)=g (a)+δg(a)where oftheformsd(k)∝kwhileotherwisethepresenceofcor-
0
δg(a) is positive and essentially counts the new pairs of relations would be signaled by a behavior of the form
nodeswhichareconnectedbyshortestgoingthroughthe
new link (a,b). sd(k)∼kβd (26)
with β > 1. In such a case, there are correlations be-
d
tween the topology and geography which implies that
2. Mixing topology and space
the typical length of the connection is not constant as it
would be in the case for β = 1 but increases with the
a. Strengths. Inmanycases,theadjacencymatrixisnot d
number of connections.
enough to fully characterize a network. This is particu-
larly clear for airline networks for example for which the
links are also characterized by the average number of
passengers w flying on the connection (ij) (for other
ij
networks, such as the Internet it can be the traffic on b. Indices α, γ and variants. Ringness. Different indices
a cable, etc.). For these weighted networks, the distri- were defined a long time ago mainly by scientists work-
bution of weights is a first indication of the existence of inginquantitativegeographysincethe1960sandcanbe
possible strong heterogeneities [29]. Another important found in [150, 268, 296] (see also the more recent paper
information is the existence of correlation between the by Xie and Levinson [322]). Most of these indices are
weightsandthedegrees. Suchacorrelationcanbeeasily relativelysimplebutgivevaluableinformationaboutthe
displayed by the study of the weight strength of a node i structureofthenetwork,inparticularifweareinterested
as defined by [29, 328] in planar networks. These indices were used to charac-
terize the topology of transportation networks and for
sw = (cid:88) w . (22) example Garrison [133] measured some properties of the
i ij Interstate highway system and Kansky [186] proposed
j∈Γ(i)
up to 14 indices to characterize these networks. We will
where the sum runs over the set Γ(i) of neighbors of i. here recall the most important indices which are called
Thestrengthgeneralizesthedegreetoweightednetworks the ‘alpha’ and the ‘gamma’ indices. The simplest index
and in the case of the air transportation network quan- is called the gamma index and is simply defined by
tifies the traffic of passengers handled by any given air-
E
port. This quantity obviously depends on the degree k γ = (27)
E
and increases (linearly) with k in the case of random un- max
correlated weights of average (cid:104)w(cid:105) as
whereE isthenumberofedgesandE isthemaximal
max
number of edges (for a given number of nodes N). For
sw ∼k(cid:104)w(cid:105) (23)
non-planar networks, E is given by N(N −1)/2 for
max
non-directed graphs and for planar graphs we saw in the
A relation between the strength sw(k) averaged over the
section II.A.2 that E =3N −6 leading to
nodes of degree k of the form max
E
sw =Akβw , (24) γ = (28)
P 3N −6
with an exponent β > 1 (or with β = 1 but with
w w
The gamma index is a simple measure of the density
A (cid:54)= (cid:104)w(cid:105)) is then the signature of non-trivial statistical
of the network but one can define a similar quantity by
correlations between weights and topology. In particu-
counting the number of elementary cycles instead of the
lar, a value β > 1 signals that the typical number of
w
edges. The number of elementary cycle for a network is
passengers per connection is not constant and increases
known as the cyclomatic number (see for example [85])
with k.
and is equal to
The notion of strength can obviously be extended to
manydifferenttypesofweights. Inparticular,forspatial
Γ=E−N +1 (29)
networks,onecandefine[31]thedistancestrengthofnode
i by
For a planar graph this number is always less or equal
(cid:88) to 2N −5 which leads naturally to the definition of the
sd = d (i,j) (25)
i E alpha index (also coined ‘meshedness’ in [66])
j∈Γ(i)
E−N +1
α= (30)
where d (i,j) is the euclidean distance between nodes i
E 2N −5
and j. This quantity sd represents the cumulated dis-
tances of all the connections from (or to) the considered Thisindexliesintheinterval[0,1]andisequalto0fora
airport. Similarly to the usual weight strength, uncorre- treeandequalto1foramaximalplanargraph. Usingthe
latedrandomconnectionswouldleadtoalinearbehavior definitionoftheaveragedegree(cid:104)k(cid:105)=2E/N thequantity
9
α reads in the large N limit as two distances between the pairs of nodes. There is of
course the natural euclidean distance d (i,j) which can
E
(cid:104)k(cid:105)−2 also be seen as the ‘as crow flies’ distance. There is also
α(cid:39) (31)
4 the total ‘route’ distance d (i,j) from i to j by com-
R
puting the sum of length of segments which belong to
which shows that in fact fora large networkthis index α
theshortestpathbetweeniandj. Theroutefactor(also
doesnotcontainmuchmoreinformationthantheaverage
calledthedetourindexorthecircuityordirectness[212])
degree.
forthispairofnodes(i,j)isthengivenby(seeFig.5for
We note that more recently, other interesting indices
an example)
were proposed in order to characterize specifically road
networks [100, 322]. For example, in [100], Courtat, d (i,j)
Gloaguen, Douady noticed that in some cities the de- Q(i,j)= R (35)
d (i,j)
E
gree distribution is very peaked around 3−4 and they
then define the ratio Thisratioisalwayslargerthanoneandtheclosertoone,
the more efficient the network. From this quantity, we
N(1)+N(3)
r = (32)
N (cid:80) N(k)
k(cid:54)=2
where N(k) is the number of nodes of degree k. If this
ratioissmallthenumberofdeadendsandof‘unfinished’
crossing (k = 3) is small compared to the number of
regular crossings with k = 4. In the opposite case of
large r , there is a dominance of k = 4 nodes which
N
signals a more organized city.
The authors of [100] also define the ‘compactness’ of
a city which measures how much a city is ‘filled’ with
FIG.5 Exampleofadetourindexcalculation. The‘ascrow
roads. IfwedenotebyAtheareaofacityandby(cid:96) the √
T flies’distancebetweenthenodesAandBisd (A,B)= 10
E
total length of roads, the compactness Ψ ∈ [0,1] can be
while the route distance over the network is d (A,B) = 4
√R
defined in terms of the hull and city areas leadingtoadetourindexequaltoQ(A,B)=4/ 10(cid:39)1.265.
4A
Ψ=1− √ (33)
can derive another one for a single node defined by
((cid:96) −2 A)2
T
1 (cid:88)
I √n the extreme case of one square city of linear size L= (cid:104)Q(i)(cid:105)= Q(i,j) (36)
N −1
A with only one road encircling it, the total length
√ j
is (cid:96) = 4 A and the compactness is then Ψ = 0. At
T
the other extreme, if the city roads constitute a square which measures the ‘accessibility’ for this specific node
grid of spacing a, the total length is (cid:96) = 2L2/a and in i. Indeed the smaller it is and the easier it is to reach
T
the limit of a/L → 0 one has a very large compactness the node i. Accessibility is a subject in itself (see for
Ψ≈1−a2/L2. example[43])andtherearemanyothermeasuresforthis
We end this section by mentioning the ringness. Arte- concept and we refer the interested reader to the article
rial roads (including freeways, major highways) provide [109, 121, 152]. This quantity (cid:104)Q(i)(cid:105) is related to the
a high level of mobility and serve as the backbone of the quantity called ‘straightness centrality’ [103]
road system [322]. Different measures (with many refer-
ences)arediscussedanddefinedin[322]andinparticular CS(i)=
1 (cid:88)d E(i,j)
(37)
the ringness is defined as N −1 d R(i,j)
j(cid:54)=i
φ = (cid:96) ring (34) And if one is interested in assessing the global efficiency
ring (cid:96) of the network, one can compute the average over all
tot
pairs of nodes (also used in [306])
where (cid:96) is the total length of arterials on rings and
ring
where the denominator (cid:96) tot is the total length of all ar- 1 (cid:88)
(cid:104)Q(cid:105)= Q(i,j) (38)
terials. This quantity ranging from 0 to 1 is thus an in-
N(N −1)
dication of the importance of a ring and to what extent i(cid:54)=j
arterials are organized as trees.
The average (cid:104)Q(cid:105) or the maximum Q , and more gen-
max
erallythestatisticsofQ(i,j)isimportantandcontainsa
lot of information about the spatial network under con-
c. Route factor, detour index. When the network is em- sideration (see [12] for a discussion on this quantity for
beddedinatwo-dimensionalspace,wecandefineatleast various networks). For example, one can define the in-
10
teresting quantity [12] ratio could then be estimated by the quantity FT/(cid:96)MST
T
which is a quantitative characterization of the trade-off
1 (cid:88) between cost and efficiency [298].
φ(d)= Q(i,j) (39)
N
d
ij/dE(i,j)=d
(where N is the number of nodes such that d (i,j) = 3. Community detection. Motifs
d E
d) whose shape can help characterizing combined spatial
and topological properties. a. Community detection. Community detection in
graphs is an important topic in complex network studies
(see the review [129]), but after almost a decade of
d. CostandEfficiency. Theminimumnumberoflinksto efforts, there is no definitive method of identification of
connect N nodes is E = N −1 and the corresponding communities, but instead many different methods with
network is a tree. We can also look for the tree which their respective advantage and drawbacks.
minimizesthetotallengthgivenbythesumofthelengths Looselyspeaking,acommunity(ora‘module’)isaset
of all links ofnodeswhichhavemoreconnectionsamongthemselves
thanwiththerestofnodes. Oneofthefirstandsimplest
(cid:88)
(cid:96) = d (e) (40) method to detect these modules is the modularity opti-
T E
e∈E mization and consists in maximizing the quantity called
modularity defined as [246]
whered (e)denotesthelengthofthelinke. Thisproce-
E
d hu asre al te oa td as llt eo ngt th he (cid:96)m Mi Sn Tim (su em eas lp soan sn ecin tig ontr Ie Ve .E(M ).S OT b) viw oh ui sc lh
y
Q=(cid:88)nM (cid:96)
s
−(cid:18) d
s
(cid:19)2
(44)
T E 2E
the tree is not a very efficient network (from the point s=1
of view of transportation for example) and usually more
where the sum is over the n modules of the partition,
edgesareaddedtothenetwork, leadingtoanincreaseof M
(cid:96) is the number of links inside module s, E is the to-
accessibility but also to of (cid:96) . A natural measure of the s
T tal number of links in the network, and d is the total
‘cost’ of the network is then given by s
degree of the nodes in module s. The first term of the
(cid:96) summand in this equation is the fraction of links inside
C = T (41) module s and the second term represents the expected
(cid:96)MST
T fraction of links in that module if links were located at
Adding links thus increases the cost but improves ac- random in the network (and by keeping the same degree
cessibilityorthetransport performanceP ofthenetwork distribution). The number of modules n M is also a vari-
whichcanbemeasuredastheminimumdistancebetween able whose value is obtained by the maximization. If for
all pairs of nodes, normalized to the same quantity but a subgraph S of a network the first term is much larger
computed for the minimum spanning tree thanthesecond,itmeansthattherearemanymorelinks
inside S than one would expect by random chance, so S
(cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105) isindeedamodule. Thecomparisonwiththenullmodel
P = (42)
(cid:104)(cid:96) (cid:105) represented by the randomized network is however mis-
MST
leading and small modules connected by at least a link
Another measure of efficiency was also proposed in [208, mightbeseenasonesinglemodule. Thisresolutionlimit
209] and is defined as was demonstrated in [130] where it is shown that mod-
√
ules of size E or smaller might not be detected by this
E = 1 (cid:88) 1 (43) method. Modularity detection was however applied in
N(N −1) (cid:96)(i,j) many different domains and is still used. In the case of
i(cid:54)=j
spatial networks, it is the only method which was used
where (cid:96)(i,j) is the shortest path distance from i to j. so far but it is clear that community detection in spa-
This quantity is zero when there are no paths between tial networks is a very interesting problem which might
thenodesandisequaltooneforthecompletegraph(for receive a specific answer. In particular, it would be in-
which (cid:96)(i,j) = 1). Combination of these different indi- teresting to see how the classification of nodes proposed
cators and comparisons with the MST or the maximal in [147] applies to spatial networks.
planarnetworkcanbeconstructedinordertocharacter-
ize various aspects of the networks under consideration
(see for example [66]). b. Motifs. The motifs are particular subgraphs that are
Finally,addinglinksimprovestheresilienceofthenet- over-representedinthenetworkwithrespecttoanuncor-
worktoattacksordysfunctions. Awaytoquantifythisis related random network with the same degree distribu-
by using the fault tolerance (FT) (see for example [298]) tion. The idea of motifs is particularly important for bi-
measured as the probability of disconnecting part of the ological networks [231] but can be applied to any type of
networkwiththefailureofasinglelink. Thebenefit/cost networks, including spatial networks. In many networks
11
found in biology, or ecology for example, a surprisingly
small number of motifs exists and each type of network
has its own characteristic set of motifs. The occurrence
ofaparticularmotifischaracterizedbyitsnormalizedZ-
score, a measure for its abundance in the network. The
similarityofthemotifdistributionsbetweendifferentnet-
works can be a signature of the ubiquity of simple pro-
cesses occuring in human interactions, good exchanges,
etc.
III. EMPIRICAL OBSERVATIONS
In this chapter we will review the most salient proper-
ties of real-world spatial networks. We will insist on fea-
tures connected to the spatial aspects of these networks
and we will give references for other aspects.
We will begin with transportation networks which are
emblematic of spatial networks. Generally speaking,
transportation networks are structures that convey en-
ergy, matter or information from one point to another.
Theyappearinavarietyofdifferentfields,includingcity
streets [66, 73], plant leaves [273], river networks [269], FIG.6 (a)Directrepresentationoftheroutes(hereforthree
mammalian circulatory systems [316], networks for com- different routes). (b) Space-of-changes (sometimes called P
moditiesdelivery[134],technologicalnetworks[278],and space [207, 283, 286])). A link connects two nodes if there
is at least one vehicle that stops at both nodes. (c) Space-
communicationnetworks[255]. Therecentavailabilityof
of-stops. Two nodes are connected if they are consecutive
massivedatasetshasopenedthepossibilityforaquanti-
stops of at least one vehicle. (d) Space-of-stations. Here two
tative analysis and modeling of these different patterns.
stations are connected only if they are physically connected
In a second part, we review the recent results obtained
(withoutanystationinbetween)andthisnetworkreflectsthe
for infrastructure networks such as roads, power grids or
real physical network. From [203].
the Internet. In particular, we will also discuss the ge-
ographical aspects of social networks. We then review
the recent results on mobility networks which describe
the physical connections. One could however construct
the statistics of human movements. We end this chap-
other networks such as the space-of-stops or the space-
ter with studies on neural networks, including the brain
of-changes (see Fig. 6). One also finds in the literature
whichisanimportantexampleofacomplexnetworkwith
ontransportationsystems,thenotionsofLandP-spaces
a spatial component. Finally, we propose at the end of
[165, 283] where the L-space connects nodes if they are
this chapter a recap under the form of a table (see table
consecutivestopsinagivenroute. ThedegreeinL-space
II).
isthenthenumberofdifferentnodesonecanreachwithin
one segment and the shortest path length represents the
numberofstops. IntheP-space,twonodesareconnected
A. Transportation networks
ifthereisatleastoneroutebetweenthemsothatthede-
greeofanodeisthenumberofnodesthatcanbereached
ThepaperofWattsandStrogatz[313]triggeredmany
directly. In this P-space the shortest path represents the
studies on networks and in particular motivated empir-
number of connections needed to go from one node to
ical analysis of various networks such as transportation
another.
networks. Thesenetworkscontrolmanyaspectinourso-
cietiesandgovernmanymodernproblemssuchasdisease
spread, congestion, urban sprawl, structure of cities. In
this section we review the main results concerning their 2. Airline networks
structure.
The airline transportation infrastructure is an im-
portant example of a spatial network. The nodes are
1. Representations identified to the airports which are located in a two-
dimensional space. The location of the nodes are not
In [203], Kurant and Thiran discuss very clearly the uniformly distributed and are determined by exogenous
different possibilities to represent a transportation sys- factors. Thelinksrepresenttheexistenceofadirectflight
tem (Fig. 6). Indeed, the simplest representation is ob- among them and obviously this network even if clearly
tained when the nodes represent the stations and links spatial is not planar.
12
a. Weightandspatialheterogeneity. The usual character-
istics of the world-wide air-transportation network using
theInternationalAirTransportationAssociation(IATA)
database IATA 1 have been presented in [29]. The net-
work is made of N = 3880 vertices and E = 18810
edges (for the year 2002) and displays both small-world
and scale-free properties as also confirmed in different
datasets and analysis [146, 149, 216]. In particular, the
average shortest path length, measured as the average
number of edges separating any two nodes in the net-
work shows the value (cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105) = 4.37, very small compared
to the network size N but largely overestimated due to
the presence of long paths between far remote areas (we
can expect it to decrease if we weight the paths by their
number of passengers).
FIG. 7 Distribution of distances (in kms) between airports
The degree distribution, takes the form linkedbyadirectconnectionfortheNorthAmericannetwork.
Thestraightlineindicatesanexponentialdecaywithscaleof
P(k)=k−γf(k/k ) (45) order 1,000 kms. From [31].
∗
whereγ (cid:39)2.0andf(k/k )isanexponentialcut-offfunc-
∗
tion. The degree distribution is therefore heavy-tailed
Bianconi, Pin, Marsili study the connection probability
with a cut-off that finds its origin in the physical con-
p for two airports and found that for the US airline
straints on the maximum number of connections that ij
network (with N = 675 airports and E = 3253 connec-
a single airport can handle [14, 146, 149]. The airport
tions) it behaves as a power law dependence of the form
connection graph is therefore a clear example of a spa-
p ∝ d (i,j)−α with α ≈ 3 for d > 100 kms. Although
tial(non-planar)small-worldnetworkdisplayingaheavy- ij E
the two quantities p and P(d) are different (p is the
tailed degree distribution and heterogeneous topological ij ij
probability used to construct the network and P(d) is
properties.
the resulting distribution obtained on the specific set of
The world-wide airline network necessarily mixes dif- airports distributed across the US territory) it is unclear
ferenteffects. Inparticularthereareclearlytwodifferent at this stage if these results are consistent.
scales, global (intercontinental) and domestic. The in-
Inadditionthesenetworksareweightedandtheweight
tercontinental scale defines two different groups of travel
on each link represents the number of maximum passen-
distances and for the statistical consistency the study
gersontheconnection. Thetrafficatanodecanthenbe
[31] focused on a single continental case with the North-
studied by the weight strength (see section II.B.2.a) and
American network constituted of N = 935 vertices with
behaves here as a power law of the degree
anaveragedegree(cid:104)k(cid:105)≈8.4andanaverageshortestpath
(cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105) ≈ 4. The statistical topological properties of the sw ∼kβw , (46)
North American network are consistent with the world-
wide one: the degree is distributed according to a power withanexponentβ (cid:39)1.7(Fig.8)demonstratingtheex-
w
law with exponent ≈1.9 on almost two orders of magni- istenceofstrongcorrelationsbetweenthedegreeandthe
tude followed by a cut-off indicating the maximum num- traffic. The distance strength (see the section II.B.2.a)
ber of connections compatible with the limited airport also behaves as a power law of the degree
capacity and the size of the network considered. The
spatialattributesoftheNorthAmericanairportnetwork sd(k)∼kβd (47)
are embodied in the physical spatial distance, measured
in kilometers, characterizing each connection. Fig. 7 dis- with β (cid:39) 1.4 (Fig. 8). This result shows the presence
d
playsthedistributionofthedistancesofthedirectflights. of important correlations between topology and geogra-
ThesedistancescorrespondtoEuclideanmeasuresofthe phy. Indeed,thefactthattheexponentsappearinginthe
links and clearly show a fast decaying behavior reason- relations Eq. (46) and Eq. (47) are larger than one have
ablyfittedbyanexponential. Theexponentialfitgivesa differentmeanings. WhileEq.(46)meansthatlargerair-
valueforatypicalscaleoftheorder1000kms. Theorigin ports have connections with larger traffic, Eq. (47) im-
of the finite scale can be traced back to the existence of plies that they have also farther-reaching connections.
physical and economical restrictions on airline planning In other terms, the traffic and the distance per connec-
in a continental setting. In a recent paper [51] however tion is not constant but increases with k. As intuitively
expected, the airline network is an example of a very
heterogeneous network where the hubs have at the same
time large connectivities, large weight (traffic) and long-
1 http://www.iata.org. distance connections [29], related by super-linear scaling
13
relations.
FIG. 9 Assortativity and clustering for the North American
FIG. 8 Weight and distance strengths versus degree for the network. Circles correspond to topological quantities while
NorthAmericannetwork. Thedashedlinescorrespondtothe the squares represent the weighted assortativity and cluster-
power-lawswithexponentsβ d (cid:39)1.4andβ w (cid:39)1.7. From[31]. ing. From [31].
degree
b. Assortativity and Clustering. A complete characteri-
zation of the network structure must take into account 1 (cid:88)
g(k)= g(v) . (48)
the level of degree correlations and clustering present in N(k)
the network. Fig. 9 displays for the North-American air-
v/kv=k
port network the behavior of these various quantities as whereN(k)isthenumberofnodesofdegreek. Formost
a function of the degree. An essentially flat k nn(k) is networks, g(k) is strongly correlated with the degree k.
obtained and a slight disassortative trend is observed at In general, the larger the degree, the larger the central-
large k, due to the fact that large airports have in fact ity. For scale-free networks it has been shown that the
many intercontinental connections to other hubs which centrality scales with k as
are located outside of North America and are not con-
sidered in this ‘regional’ network. The clustering is very g(k)∼kη (49)
large and is slightly decreasing at large k. This behav-
ior is often observed in complex networks and is here whereη dependsonthenetwork[35,138]. Forsomenet-
a direct consequence of the role of large airports that works however, the betweenness centrality fluctuations
provide non-stop connections to different regions which around the behavior given by Eq. (49) can be very large
arenotinterconnectedamongthem. Moreover,weighted and‘anomalies’canoccur,inthesensethatthevariation
correlations are systematically larger than the topolog- ofthecentralityversusdegreeisnotamonotonousfunc-
ical ones, signaling that large weights are concentrated tion. Guimer`a and Amaral [149] have shown that this
on links between large airports which form well inter- is indeed the case for the worldwide air-transportation
connected cliques (see also [29] for more details). network. This is a very relevant observation in that very
central cities may have a relatively low degree and vice
versa. Fig. 10 displays the average behavior along with
c. Betweenness Centrality. As discussed in the section thescatteredplotofthebetweennessversusdegreeofall
II.B.1.d, the betweenness centrality is a very interesting airports of the North American network. In this case we
quantitywhichcharacterizestheimportanceofanodein find also very large fluctuations with a behavior similar
the network. The more central the node and the larger to that observed in [146].
the number of shortest paths going through this node. These different observations call for the need of a net-
it is thus natural to observe strong correlations between workmodelembeddedinrealspacewhichcanreproduce
the betweenness centrality and the degree. However for these betweenness centrality features observed in real
a lattice, the betweenness centrality is maximal at the networks. More generally these different results point
barycenter of all nodes and we thus expect for real spa- out the importance of space as a relevant ingredient in
tialnetworksaninterestinginterplaybetweenthedegree the structure of networks. In the chapter about mod-
of the node and its distance to the barycenter. els (section IV) we focus on the interplay between spa-
More precisely, it is generally useful to represent the tialembedding,topologyandweightsinasimplegeneral
average betweenness centrality for vertices of the same model for weighted networks in order to provide a mod-
14
a very important role in many processes such as disease
spread for example.
3. Bus, subway, railway, and commuters
a. Subways. One of the first studies (after the Watts-
Strogatz paper) on the topology of a transportation net-
work was proposed by Latora and Marchiori [207] who
considered the Boston subway network. It is a relatively
smallnetworkwithN =124stations. Theaverageshort-
est path is (cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105) ∼ 16 a value which is large compared
to ln124 ≈ 5 and closer to the two-dimensional result
√
124≈11.
In[286]SienkiewiczandHolyststudyalargersetmade
ofpublictransportationnetworksofbusesandtramways
FIG.10 Scatter-plotofthebetweennesscentralityversusde-
for22Polishcitiesandin[305]vonFerberetal. studythe
gree for nodes of the North American air-transportation net-
public transportation networks for 15 world cities. The
work. The (red) squares correspond to the average between-
ness centrality versus degree. From [31]. number of nodes of these networks varies from N = 152
to 2811 in [286] and in the range [1494,44629] in [305].
Interestinglyenoughtheauthorsof[286]observeastrong
eling framework considering these three aspects at once. correlation between the number of stations and the pop-
ulation which is not the case for the world cities studied
in [305] where the number of stations seems to be in-
d. Communities. In [149], Guimera et al. used modu- dependent from the population2. For the polish cities
larityoptimizationwithsimulatedannealing(seesection the degree has an average in the range [2.48,3.08] and in
II.B.3) in order to identify communities defined by the a similar range [2.18,3.73] for [305]. In both cases, the
worldwide air network. The obtained result is shown in degreedistributionisrelativelypeaked(therangeofvari-
ation is usually of the order of one decade) consistently
with the existence of physical constraints [14].
Due to the relatively small range of variation of N in
these various studies [207, 286, 305], the behavior of the
average shortest path is not clear and could be fitted by
alogarithmorapowerlawaswell. Wecanhowevernote
that the average shortest path is usually large (of order
10in[286]andintherange[6.4,52.0]in[305])compared
to lnN, suggesting that the behavior of (cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105) might not
be logarithmic with N but more likely scales as N1/2, a
behavior typical of a two-dimensional lattice.
The average clustering coefficient (cid:104)C(cid:105) in [286] varies
in the range [0.055,0.161] and is larger than a value of
FIG. 11 Communities of the worldwide air transportation
the order C ∼1/N ∼10−3−10−2 corresponding to a
network obtained with modularity optimization. Each node ER
random ER graph. The ratio (cid:104)C(cid:105)/C is explicitly con-
representsanairportandeachcolorcorrespondstoacommu- ER
sidered in [305] and is usually much larger than one (in
nity. From [149].
therange[41,625]). Thedegree-dependentclusteringco-
efficient C(k) seems to present a power law dependence,
Fig.11whereeachcolorcorrespondstoacommunity. We
but the fit is obtained over one decade only.
immediately can see that most of these communities are
In another study [279], the authors study two urban
actually determined by geographical factors and there-
trainnetworks(BostonandViennawhicharebothsmall
fore is not very informative: the most important flows
N =124 and N =76, respectively) and their results are
areamongnodesinthesamegeographicalregions. More
consistent with the previous ones.
interesting are the spatial anomalies which belong to a
Due to the limited availability of data, there are less
community from the modularity point of view but which
studiesonthepassengerflowsandthedatasofarseemto
areinanothergeographicalregion. Forexample,the‘red’
communityofwesternEuropealsocontainsairportsfrom
Asian Russia. More generally, it is clear that in the case
of spatial networks, community detection offers a visual
2 Incidentally, connecting socio-economical indicators to proper-
representation of large exchange zones. It also allows to
tiesofthesenetworksiscertainlyaveryinterestinganddifficult
identifytheinter-communitieslinkswhichprobablyplay questionwhichprobablywillbeaddressedinthefuture.
15
indicate that the flow is broadly distributed [211, 270] a
feature which seems to be common to many transporta-
tion systems (see Table II).
b. Rail. One of the first studies of the structure of rail-
way network [283] concerns a subset of the most impor-
tantstationsandlinesoftheIndianrailwaynetworkand
hasN =587stations. IntheP-spacerepresentation(see FIG. 13 EU rail dataset. (a) Physical layout of the network
section III.A.1), there is a link between two stations if showing node of size proportional to (a) the degree, (b) the
there is a train connecting them and in this representa- node betweenness centrality , (c) the real load. In (d, top)
tion, the average shortest path is of order (cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105) ≈ 5 which the degree versus the centrality is shown and in (d, bottom)
the betweenness versus the real load. [202].
indicates that one needs 4 connections in the worst case
to go from one node to another one. In order to obtain
variations with the number of nodes, the authors con-
indicators is poor (with a Pearson correlation coefficient
sidered different subgraphs with different sizes N. The
equal to 0.5 for betweenness centrality−k and 0.26 for
clusteringcoefficientvariesslowlywithN isalwayslarger
the correlation betweenness centrality-real load). As ex-
than ≈ 0.7 which is much larger than a random graph
pected from general considerations developed in the sec-
valueoforder1/N. Finallyinthisstudy[283],itisshown
tion II.B.1.d, we see large fluctuations in the relation k
that the degree distribution is behaving as an exponen-
andthebetweennesscentrality,butsurprisinglyhere,the
tialandthattheassortativity(cid:104)k (cid:105)(k)isflatshowingan
nn degreeseemstobeabetterindicatoroftherealloadthan
absenceofcorrelationsbetweenthedegreeofanodeand
the betweenness centrality [202].
those of its neighbors.
In [203], Kurant and Thiran study the railway system
of Switzerland and major trains and stations in Europe
c. Urban commuters network. As discussed above, it is
(and also the public transportation system of Warsaw,
importanttoknowhowtheflowsofindividualsarestruc-
Poland). The Swiss railway network contains N = 1613
tured in a dense urban area (Theoretical discussions
nodes and E = 1680 edges (Fig. 12). All conclusions
about this problem can be found in the section III.C.3
about the so-called gravity law). In [82], Chowell et al.
study the simulated movements of 1.6 million individu-
als during a typical day in the city of Portland (Oregon,
USA)andconstructanetworkwherethenodesrepresent
thelocations(buildings,homes,etc)andwheretheedges
represent the flow of individuals between these locations
(see Fig. 14). The distribution of the outdegree (which
FIG. 12 Physical map of the Swiss railway networks. From
[203].
drawn here are consistent with the various cases pre-
sented in this chapter. In particular, the average degree
is (cid:104)k(cid:105) ≈ 2.1, the average shortest path is ≈ 47 (consis-
√
tent with the N result for a two-dimensional lattice),
the clustering coefficient is much larger than its random
counterpart, and the degree distribution is peaked (ex- FIG. 14 Construction of the network between the locations
ponentially decreasing). in Portland as reported in [82]. The weight w on the link
ij
Finally, in [202] Kurant and Thiran studied networks i−j represents the daily traffic from i to j. After [82].
by decomposing it into layers (see Fig. 13). In particu-
lar, they compare the spatial distribution of the degree, is the number of edges leaving a node), and of the corre-
the node betweenness centrality and the real load. As sponding out-traffic, are well-fitted by power laws. The
showninFig.13dthecorrelationbetweenthesedifferent clustering coefficient for different types of locations are
16
alllargeandwhenallactivitiesareaggregated,thecorre- 185,324]. Thisnetworkisparticularlyimportantasmore
sponding clustering coefficient behaves as 1/k (Fig. 15). than 90% of the world trade is carried by the sea.
It thus seems that at this relatively small scale, space Cargoshipsarenotallthesameandcanbeeitherbulk
is not constraining enough (or in other words the cost dry carriers, oil tankers or can be designed to transport
variations are too small) and the important features of containerized cargo. These different cargo types define
spatial networks do not seem to appear here. different networks which can display different properties
[185]. In the case of containerized cargo, many impor-
tant statistical parameters were measured in [165] and
we summarize here their results. The dataset consists in
N =878portsand1802differentlinesgiving7955edges.
In the L-space representation (see section III.A.1), the
nodesaretheportsandthereisalinkbetweentwoports
when they are connected by a direct route. The short-
est path between two ports in this representation thus
represents the number of stops needed to travel between
these two nodes. The average degree of the undirected
version of this network is (cid:104)k(cid:105) ≈ 9, the average cluster-
ing coefficient is (cid:104)C(cid:105) ≈ 0.40 which is much larger than
1/878≈10−3. Theaverageshortestpathis(cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105)≈3.6and
the out-, in- and undirected degree distributions seem
to be relatively broad with maximum values as large as
k ∼ 102. More clearly the weight (defined as the num-
FIG. 15 Loglog plots of the clustering coefficient C(k) as a ber of container lines for a given time period) and the
function of the out-degree for subnetworks constructed from strength (see section ??) are broadly distributed. The
work activities, school activities, social activities, and all the power law fit proposed in [165] gives a behavior for the
activities grouped together (the dotted line has slope 1). For
weight P(w) ∼ 1/w (for w < 100, see Fig. 16). The
social and recreational activities C(k)∼1/k but for the net-
strength (see II.B.2) versus the degree display a nonlin-
works constructed from work activities, the clustering coeffi-
ear behavior (Fig. 16) typical of these networks. The
cient is almost constant. From [82].
exponent is of order β (cid:39) 1.3 not far from the values
β (cid:39)1.4−1.5 measured for the worldwide network.
Atalargerscale,deMontisetal. [107]studiedthenet-
For this weighted network, weighted clustering and
workrepresentingtheinterurbancommutingtrafficofthe
weighted assortativity were also measured [165] showing
Sardiniaisland(Italy), whichamountsto375municipal-
that Cw(k) > C(k) and kw (k) > k (k) which is the
ities and 1.6 millions inhabitants. The nodes correspond nn nn
typical sign that most of the traffic takes place on link
to towns and the edges to the actual commuting flows
connecting various hubs. Also this network is weakly as-
among those. This network has a peaked distribution of
sortative with an almost flat k (k).
degrees and similarly to the urban case studied in [82], nn
The behavior of the betweenness centrality with the
the flows are very heterogeneous and can be fitted by a
degree is interesting and is shown in Fig. 17 where we
power law with exponent ≈ 1.8. In contrast with [82]
see that anomalies are very rare: the larger the degree
where the relation between the strength and the degree
and the larger the betweenness centrality. This particu-
is linear, it is strongly non-linear with β ≈ 1.9 in this
larfeature(whichmakesthisnetworkverydifferentfrom
inter-urban case.
the worldwide air travel network) might come from the
Still in the case of commuters, a recent study [75]
factthatgeographicalconstraintsarelesssevereforcargo
used modularity optimization to determine communities
ships. We saw that the existence of anomalies could be
from this inter-urban commuters weighted network and
linked to the fact that long links are difficult to create
showed that there is a consistency between the obtained
and must be compensated by a large degree. Longer
communities and the administrative regions. A similar
links here are maybe less costly and constraints there-
result was obtained using bank notes dispersal in [300].
fore smaller leading to less anomalies and to a behavior
Community detection was also used on the Belgian mo-
closer to a power law (cid:104)g(k)(cid:105) ∼ kη typical of standard
bilephonenetworktoidentifylanguagecommunities[53].
non-spatial networks.
Communitydetectionthusappearsasaninterestingtool
for defining scientifically administrative boundaries and Recently,in[185]Kaluzaetal. studiedalargerdataset
more generally for policy making and planning. (obtainedfortheyear2007)with490,517non-stopjour-
neys between 36,351 distinct pairs of departure and ar-
rival ports. They also found a small average shortest
4. Cargo-ship path (cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105) ≈ 2.5 with more than 50% of possible origin-
destination pairs that can be connected by two steps or
The last example of transportation network that we less. This study confirms the facts that the average clus-
willdiscussinthischapteristhecargoshipnetwork[165, tering is large, and that the degree, weight, and strength
17
portation networks (such as mail or freight [96]) and is
probably the sign of distribution networks as opposed to
travelnetworkswherebasicallyeveryindividualperforms
a roundtrip implying symmetrical weights w ≈w .
ij ji
The strength in [185] also scales as a power law of
the degree with an exponent (cid:39) 1.46 not far from the
values of the exponents found in other networks. Fi-
nally the betweenness centrality scales well with the de-
gree and displays very few anomalies in agreement with
[165]. Aftertheseratherstandardmeasurements,theau-
thors of [185] proposed other measurements. They first
characterized the community structure (Figure 18) for
threesubnetworksofthiscargonetworkobtainedfordif-
ferent ship types (containers, bulk dry carriers, and oil
tankers). These communities were obtained by optimiz-
FIG.16 (a)Weightdistributionfortheworldwidemaritime
network (the power law fit gives an exponent ≈ 0.95). (b)
Strength versus degree showing a nonlinear behavior (the fit
gives an exponent ≈1.3). From [165].
FIG. 18 Communities of ports obtained for the cargo net-
works obtained for different types of ships: (a) container
ships, (b) bulk dry carriers, and (c) oil tankers. The optimal
values of the number of communities c and the modularity
Q are shown in the bottom right corner of each panel. From
[185].
ingthemodularityQ(seesectionII.B.3). Thisprocedure
might miss some small structures [130] but at large scale
FIG. 17 Betweenness centrality versus the degree k. The can be trusted. Indeed in this case, groups are observed
power law fit for the L-space gives 1.66 and 1.93 in the P- which are geographically consistent demonstrating the
space. From [165]. relevance of this method in this case. One could even
think that community detection might be an important
tool in geography and in the determination of new ad-
distributions are large. The exponent of the weight (de- ministrative or economical boundaries.
finedhereastheavailablespaceonallships)distribution Finally, the authors of [185] studied the statistical oc-
is equal to ≈1.7 and is different from the study [165]. currence of motifs, a method developed in a biological
The weight is also very asymmetric (ie. w (cid:54)= w ) context [231]. In Fig. 19, we reproduce the motif dis-
ij ji
with 59% of all linked pairs which exist in one direction tribution for the three main cargo fleets compared with
only. This feature can also be observed in other trans- the results for the Web and social networks displaying
18
ized by Hillier and Hanson [161] under the term ‘space
syntax’. In this chapter, we will discuss different recent
measures of these networks in the light of our current
understanding of the structure of networks.
a. Degrees, lengths, and cell areas. In [66, 73] measure-
mentsfordifferentcitiesintheworldarereported. Based
on the data from these sources, the authors of [39] plot-
ted (Fig. 20a) the number of roads E (edges) versus
the number of intersections N. The plot is consistent
with a linear fit with slope ≈ 1.44 (which is consistent
with the value (cid:104)k(cid:105) ≈ 2.5 measured in [66]). The quan-
tity e = E/N = (cid:104)k(cid:105)/2 displays values in the range
1.05 < e < 1.69, in between the values e = 1 and
e = 2 that characterize tree-like structures and 2d regu-
lar lattices, respectively. In a study of 20 German cities,
L¨ammer et al. [206] showed that most nodes have four
FIG.19 Z-scoreforthedifferentmotifsshownatthebottom
neighbors(thefulldegreedistributionisshowninFig.22)
of the figure. Results are shown for the three main cargo
andthatforvariousworldcitiesthedegreerarelyexceeds
fleetsandforcomparisonwiththeWWWandsocialnetworks.
5[73]. Thesevaluesarehowevernotveryindicative: pla-
From [185].
narityimposessevereconstraintsonthedegreeofanode
and on its distribution which is generally peaked around
itsaveragevalue. Fewexactvaluesandboundsareavail-
surprising similarities pointing to the existence of ‘supe-
able for the average degree of classical models of planar
runiversal’ features in complex networks.
graphs. In general it is known that e ≤ 3, while it has
beenrecentlyshown[137]thate>13/7forplanarErd¨os-
Renyi graphs ([137] and section IV.B).
B. Infrastructure networks
In Fig. 20b, we can see that the total length (cid:96) of the
T
Our modern societies depend crucially on infrastruc- network versus N for the towns considered in [73]. Data
turenetworks. Movementofpeopleonroadsandstreets, are well fitted by a power function of the form
water and gas distribution, power grids, and communi-
(cid:96) =µNβ (50)
cation networks are all networks vital to the good func- T
tioning of the societies. In this chapter, we will review
with µ ≈ 1.51 and β ≈ 0.49. In order to understand
the most important and recent results on their structure
this result, one has to focus on the street segment length
in relation with spatial aspects.
distribution P((cid:96) ). This quantity has been measured for
1
London in [224] and is shown in Fig. 21. This figure
shows that the distribution decreases rapidly and the fit
1. Road and street networks
proposed by the authors of [224] suggests that
Despite the peculiar geographical, historical, social-
P((cid:96) )∼(cid:96)−γ (51)
economical mechanisms that have shaped distinct urban 1 1
areas in different ways (see for example [214] and refer-
with γ (cid:39) 3.36 which implies that both the average and
ences therein), recent empirical studies [42, 73, 84, 102,
the dispersion are well-defined and finite. If we assume
175, 176, 206, 220] have shown that, at least at a coarse
that this result extends to other cities, it means that we
grained level, unexpected quantitative similarities exist
have a typical distance (cid:96) between nodes which is mean-
1
between road networks of very different cities. The sim-
ingful. This typical distance between connected nodes
plestdescriptionofthestreetnetworkconsistsofagraph
then naturally scales as
whoselinksrepresentroads,andverticesrepresentroads’
intersections and end points. For these graphs, links in- 1
tersect essentially only at vertices and are thus planar.3 (cid:96) 1 ∼ √ ρ (52)
Measuring spatial properties of cities through the anal-
ysis of the street network is not new and was popular- where ρ = N/L2 is the density of vertices and L the
linear dimension of the ambient space. This implies that
the total length scales as
3 Forroads,highways,etc. planaritycanbeviolatedduetobridges (cid:104)k(cid:105) √
(cid:96) ∼E(cid:96) ∼ L N (53)
butcanbeconsideredasagoodapproximation[206]. T 1 2
19
presented so far, at this stage, is that the road network
is an homogeneous and translational invariant structure.
However, this network naturally produces a set of non
overlapping cells, encircled by the roads themselves and
covering the embedding plane, and surprisingly, the dis-
tributionoftheareaAofsuchcellsmeasuredforthecity
of Dresden in Germany (Fig. 22) has the form
P(A)∼A−α (54)
with α (cid:39) 1.9. This is in sharp contrast with the simple
picture of an almost regular lattice which would predict
adistributionP(A)peakedaround(cid:96)2. Itisinterestingto
1
FIG. 22 (a) Degree distribution of degrees for the road net-
work of Dresden. (b) The frequency distribution of the cells
FIG. 20 (a) Numbers of roads versus the number of nodes
surface areas A obeys a power law with exponent α ≈ 1.9
(ie. intersectionsandcenters)fordatafrom[73](circles)and c
(for the road network of Dresden). From [206].
from [66] (squares). In the inset, we show a zoom for a small
numberofnodes. (b)Totallengthversusthenumberofnodes.
√
The line is a fit which predicts a growth as N (data from notethatifweassumethatA∼1/(cid:96)2 ∼1/ρandthatρis
1
[73] and figures from [39]). distributed according to a law f(ρ) (with a finite f(0)),
a simple calculation gives
1
P(A)∼ f(1/A) (55)
A2
which behaves as P(A)∼1/A2 for large A. This simple
argument thus suggests that the observed value ≈2.0 of
the exponent is universal and reflects the random vari-
ation of the density. More measurements are however
needed at this point in order to test the validity of this
hypothesis.
The authors of [206] also measured the distribution of
the form factor φ = 4A/(πD2), (the ratio of the area of
thecelltotheareaofthecircumscribedcircle)andfound
that most cells have a form factor between 0.3 and 0.6,
suggesting a large variety of cell shapes, in contradiction
with the assumption of an almost regular lattice. These
factsthuscallforamodelradicallydifferentfromsimple
models of regular or perturbed lattices.
FIG. 21 Length distribution P((cid:96) ) for the street network of Finally, we note that the degree distribution in the
1
London (and for the model GRPG proposed in this study). dual representation has been studied [184] for the road
From [224]). network in the US, England, and Denmark and displays
broad fluctuations with a power law distribution with
√ exponent 2.0<γ <2.5.
This simple argument reproduces well the N behavior
observed in Fig. 20 and also the value (given the error
bars) of the prefactor µ≈(cid:104)k(cid:105)k/2. b. Betweennesscentrality. The importance of a road can
The simplest hypothesis consistent with all the data be characterized by its traffic which can be measured by
20
sensors (see for example [277])4. If we assume that the
traffic between all pairs of nodes is the same a natural
proxy for the traffic is the betweenness centrality. Even
if the underlying assumptions are not correct the spatial
distribution of the betweenness centrality gives impor-
tant information about the coupling between space and
the structure of the road network.
L¨ammer et al [206] studied the German road net-
work and obtained very broad distributions of between-
ness centrality with a power law exponent in the range
[1.279,1.486] (for Dresden ≈ 1.36). These broad distri-
FIG. 24 Colour-coded maps for different centralities in
Venice, Italy (see [102]). (1) Closeness, (2) Betweenness cen-
trality,(3)Straightness,(4)Information(frombluetoredthe
centrality increases). From [102].
FIG.23 BetweennesscentralityforthecityofDresden. The
width of the links corresponds to the betweenness centrality.
From [206].
siblythecongestion, arecentpaper[294]proposesanin-
butions of the betweenness centrality signals the strong
terestingdirectionwhichisinthegeneralcontextofcon-
heterogeneity of the network in terms of traffic, with the
necting topological measures of the networks and socio-
existenceofafewverycentralroadswhichveryprobably
economical indices. In particular, Strano et al. show
points to some congestion traffic problems. Also the ab-
thatthereisaclearcorrelationbetweenthebetweenness
sence of a scale in a power law distribution suggests that
centrality and the presence of commercial activities.
the importance of roads is organized in a hierarchical
way, a property expected for many transportation net-
works[327]. Thebroadnessofthebetweennesscentrality
distribution does not seem however to be universal. In-
deed, in [102, 275], the betweenness centrality distribu-
c. Other measures. Buhl et al. [66] measured different
tionispeaked(dependingonthecityeitherexponentially
indicesfor300mapscorrespondingmostlytosettlements
or according to a Gaussian) which signals the existence
located in Europe, Africa, Central America, India. They
of a scale and therefore of a finite number of congested
foundthatmanynetworksdepartfromthegridstructure
points in the city. The betweenness centrality is in itself
with an alpha index (or Meshedness) usually low. For
interesting since it points to the important zone which
various world cities, Cardillo et al. [73] found that the
potentially are congested. The Figs. 23,24 display the
alpha index varies from 0.084 (Walnut Creek) to 0.348
spatialdistributionofthebetweennesscentralityforvar-
(New York City) which reflects in fact the variation of
ious cities. As expected zones which are central from a
the average degree. Indeed for both these extreme cases,
geographical point of view also have a large betweenness
usingEq.(31)leadstoα (cid:39)(3.38−2)/4(cid:39)0.345and
centrality. We however see that other roads or zones can NYC
forWalnutCreekα (cid:39)(2.33−2)/4(cid:39)0.083. Thissame
havealargebetweennesscentralitypointingtoacomplex WC
studyseemstoshowthattrianglesarelessabundantthan
pattern of flow distribution in cities.
squares (except for cities such as Brasilia or Irvine).
In addition to have a relation with the traffic and pos-
Measures of efficiency are relatively well correlated
with the alpha index but displays broader variations
demonstrating that small variations of the alpha index
4 Thetrafficbetweentwozonesgivenbytheorigin-destinationma- can lead to large variations in the shortest path struc-
trix(seesectionIII.C)ishowevermuchmoredifficulttoobtain. ture. Cardillo et al plotted the relative efficiency (see
21
section II.B.2.d) evolvedforaratherlongtime(sometimesacentury)and
arenowcomplexsystemswithalargevarietyofelements
E−EMST and actors playing in their functioning. This complexity
E = (56)
rel EGT −EMST leads to the relatively unexpected result that their ro-
bustness is actually not very well understood and large
versus the relative cost
blackoutssuchasthehugeAugust2003blackoutinNorth
America call for the need of a better understanding of
C−CMST
C = (57) these networks.
rel CGT −CMST
The topological structure of these networks was stud-
where GT refers to the greedy triangulation (the max- ied in different papers such as [9, 14, 288]. In particular,
imal planar graph) and MST to the minimal spanning in [14] and [9], the authors study the Southern Califor-
tree. The cost is here estimated as the total length of nian and the North American power grids. In these net-
segmentsC ≡(cid:96) (seesectionII.B.2.d). Theobtainedre- works the nodes represent the power plants, distributing
T
sult is shown in Fig. 25 which demonstrates two things. and transmission substations, and the edges correspond
First, it shows – as expected – that efficiency is increas- to transmission lines. These networks are typically pla-
nar (see for example the Italian case, Fig. 26) and we
expectapeakeddegreedistribution, decreasingtypically
as an exponential of the form P(k) ∼ exp(−k/(cid:104)k(cid:105)) with
(cid:104)k(cid:105) of order 3 in Europe and 2 in the US. The other
FIG. 26 (a) Map of the Italian power grid. (b) Topology of
the Italian power grid. (c) Degree distribution for the Euro-
FIG.25 Relativeefficiencyversusrelativecostfor20different pean network (UCTE), Italy and the UK and Ireland. In all
cities in the world. In this plot the point (0,0) corresponds cases the degree distribution is peaked and can be fitted by
to the MST and the point (1,1) to the greedy triangulation. exponential. From [288].
From [73].
studiesonUSpowergridsconfirmthatthedegreedistri-
ing with the cost with an efficiency saturating at ∼ 0.8.
butionisexponential(seeFig.27). In[9],Albert,Albert,
In addition, this increase is slow: typically, doubling the
andNakaradoalsostudiedtheload(aquantitysimilarto
value of C shifts the efficiency from ∼0.6 to ∼0.8. Sec-
the betweenness centrality) and found a broad distribu-
ond, it shows that most of the cities are located in the
tion. The degree being peaked we can then expect very
high cost-high efficiency region. New York City, Savan-
largefluctuationsofloadforthesamevalueofthedegree,
nah and San Francisco have the largest value of the effi-
as expected in general for spatial networks (see section
ciency (∼ 0.8) with a relative cost value around ∼ 0.35.
II.B.1.d). These authors also found a large redundance
Itseems however atthisstagedifficult toclearlyidentify
in this network with however 15% of cut-edges.
differentclassesofcitiesandfurtherstudieswithalarger
Also, as expected for these networks, the clustering
number of cities is probably needed in order to confirm
coefficient is rather large and even independent of k as
the typology proposed in [73].
shown in the case of the power grid of Western US (see
Finally, we mention the recent study [99] on the street
Fig. 28).
and subway networks of Paris and London. The acces-
sibility in these cities is studied in terms of self-avoiding Beside the distribution of electricity, our modern so-
random walks displaying several differences. In partic- cieties also rely on various other distribution networks.
ular, Paris seems to have a larger average accessibility The resilience of these networks to perturbations is thus
thanLondon,probablyduetoalargenumberofbridges. an important point in the design and operating of these
systems. In [326], Yazdani and Jeffrey study the topo-
logical properties of the Colorado Springs Utilities and
2. Power grids and water distribution networks the Richmond (UK) water distribution networks (shown
in Fig. 29). Both these networks (of size N = 1786 and
Power grids are one of the most important infrastruc- N = 872, respectively) are sparse planar graphs with
ture in our societies. In modern countries, they have very peaked distributions (the maximum degree is 12).
22
FIG.29 Representationofwaterdistributionnetworks. Left
panels(fromtoptobottom): Syntheticnetworks(‘Anytown’
[307],and‘EXNET’[127]). Top-rightpanel: ColoradoSpring
Utilitiesnetwork. Bottom-rightpanel: Richmond(UK)water
distribution network. From [326].
3. The Internet
The Internet is the physical layout for the WWW
which organizes the information and makes it accessi-
ble. Atasmallscale, theInternetisanetworkofrouters
connected by wires. At a larger scale, the routers are
FIG.27 DegreedistributionofsubstationsinSouthernCal-
grouped according to an administrative authority, the
ifornia (top panel) and for the North American power grid
autonomous system (AS) and at this level, the Internet
(bottom panel). In both cases, the lines represent an expo-
can be seen as a set of interconnected AS.
nential fit. From [14] and [9], respectively.
There is obviously a very large literature in computer
science (but also in statistical physics [255]) about the
Internetanditsstructure. Herewewillbrieflygivesome
characteristics of this important network that we believe
are related to the spatial aspects of the Internet.
The nodes of this network (routers) are distributed
amongdifferentcountriesandoneexpectsanon-uniform
distribution depending on socio-economical factors. In-
deed, this distribution as been shown in [329] to form a
fractalsetofdimensiond (cid:39)1.5stronglycorrelatedwith
f
the population density.5 Concerning the links, there is
an obvious cost associated with their length and one ex-
pects a rapidly decreasing length distribution. In most
models (in particular for the Waxman model [314], see
also section IV.B.4), the link distribution is assumed to
be an exponential of the form e−d/d0 but the authors of
FIG. 28 Scaling of the clustering C(k) for the Power Grid [329] seemed to observe results consistent with a slower
of the Western United States. The dashed line has a slope
−1 and the solid line corresponds to the average clustering
coefficient. From [263].
5 Thefractaldimensionisheretheusualone-seeforexamplethe
book[69]andisnotthefractaldimensionthatcouldbedefined
foranetwork[289].
23
decay P(d)∼1/d over one decade. over distances in the range 1−100 kms. The exponent
The clustering coefficient for the Internet is maybe describing the decay with distance is thus equal to 2.0 in
more interesting. At the AS level, it varies [263] as this example and supports the idea of a gravity law (see
C(k) ∼ 1/k, a behavior typical of many scale-free net- section III.C.3) even in the context of social ties. This
works [113]. However in sharp contrast with this result, result is also consistent with the measure obtained for
if we do not aggregate the nodes and stay at the router inter-cityphoneintensityexponent(see[200]andsection
level, we observe [263], a clustering coefficient approxi- III.C.3.d). According to Kleinberg’s navigability theo-
mately constant (Fig. 30). rem [195], this result also shows that this social network
is navigable (see section V.D for a discussion on naviga-
bility).
However, another study [217] on a social network of
more than one millions bloggers in the USA shows con-
vincinglythattheproportionofpairsofnodesatdistance
d which are friends decays as
P(d)−ε∼d−α (59)
where α ≈ 1 and where ε ≈ 5×10−6. In addition, this
exponent α of order one is confirmed in another studies
[21, 140] on Facebook users and on email communica-
tions. Interestingly, a recent paper [166] showed that
thisspatialscalingP(d)∼1/dcouldresultfromthefact
that most individuals tend to maximize the diversity of
theirfriendships(whichcanbeseenasthemaximization
FIG.30 ScalingoftheclusteringC(k)fortheInternetatthe ofinformationentropy). Theplateauobservedin[217]at
routerlevel. Thedashedlinehasaslope−1andthesolidline ε>0showsthataboveacertaindistance(hereoftheor-
corresponds to the average clustering coefficient. From [263]. der≈1,000kms),theprobabilityP(d)flattenstoacon-
stant value independent of distance and which probably
All these different results suggest that the location of resultsfromcomplexprocessesactinginsocialnetworks.
nodes is given exogenously and should be the input of a For this network, on an average of eight neighbors, we
realisticmodel. Oncethelocationofthenodesgiven,the then have on average 5.5 friends living in the proximity
linklengthdistributionandthebehavioroftheclustering whileonly2.5resultfromnon-geographicprocesses(fora
coefficient suggest that there is a competition between discussionaboutnavigabilityonthisnetwork,seesection
preferentialattachmentandaspatialdependence,model V.D.6). Thisisconsistentwiththeresultsof[140]where
that we will discuss in the next chapter IV.B. itisshownthatabout40%ofemailsweresentwithinthe
same city (for this particular panel of individuals).
Although there is no agreement so far (but we expect
4. Geography in social networks
rapid developments on this topic) on the nature of the
decay and the value of the exponent, the existence of
With the development of information technologies, we
an important spatial component in social networks is
can now have an idea about some aspects of the struc-
rather clear and at this point it seems that on average
ture of social networks. In particular, as expected, space
the majority of our friends are in our spatial neighbor-
is also important in social networks. It is indeed reason-
hood. This is confirmed in a recent paper [276] which
abletothinkthatinordertominimizetheeffortsandto
measured a variety of parameters on four different on-
maintain a social tie [338] most individuals will connect
line social networks (BrightKite, FourSquare, LiveJour-
with their spatial neighbors. As a measure of the social
nal, Twitter) and showed in particular that there is a
tie, Lambiotte et al. [205] used mobile phone data for
majority of short-distance links between users. This de-
3.3 millions customers in Belgium. For each customer,
pendence with space seems to go even beyond friendship
a certain number of attributes is known and in partic-
and applies to other social processes such as collaborat-
ular the zip code of the address where the bill is sent.
ing and writing a paper together [77]. In fact, the strong
After some filtering procedures, the resulting network is
association between friendship and spatial location led
made of 2.5 millions nodes (customers) and 5.4 millions
Backstrom, Sun, Marlow [21] to propose an algorithm
links,givinganaveragedegree(cid:104)k(cid:105)=4.3. Thedegreedis-
-whichexceedsIP-basedgeolocation-topredicttheloca-
tribution is peaked (the power law fit proposed in [205]
tion of people in Facebook who didn’t provide this infor-
gives an exponent γ ≈ 5) and the probability P(d) that
mation.
two connected individuals are separated by an euclidean
distance d is found to behave as [205] Clusteringseemsalsotobelargeasshownin[21,205].
In particular, Lambiotte et al. [205] studied the proba-
P(d)∼d−2 (58) bility c(d) that a link of length d belongs to a triangle.
24
This probability decreases with distance and reaches a areaofinterestindifferentzoneslabelledbyi=1,...,N
plateau at around 0.32 above 40 kms. It is interesting and to count the number of individuals going from loca-
to note also that the average duration of a phone call tion i to location j. This number is called the origin-
depends also on the distance (see Fig. 31) and saturates destination (OD) matrix and is denoted in this review
to a value of about 4 minutes for the same value d>40 by T . This quantity is at the core of many transporta-
ij
kmsobtainedforc(d). Theseresultsledtheseauthorsto tion models and its properties have been discussed in a
large number of papers. It defines a network, directed
and weighted, andin the generalcase is time-dependent.
Thisquantityisofcourseverydifferentfroma‘segment’
measurement where we can easily count the number of
individuals going through an individual segment of the
transportationsystemunderconsideration(itcanbeone
ofthelinkoftheairlinenetwork,asegmentofroad,etc.).
In contrast, the OD matrix is usually extremely difficult
and costly to obtain and measure.
Despite all the difficulties in measuring the OD ma-
trix, recent technological advances such as the GPS, the
democratization of mobile phones together with geoso-
cial applications, etc. allow for precise measurements on
large datasets and point to the possibility to understand
quantitativelyurbanmovements. Inthenextsectionswe
will then review some recent results in this field.
FIG.31 Averagedurationt ofaphonecallasafunctionof
d
the distance d. A saturation is observed for distances larger
than 40 kms. From [205].
2. Distribution of the trip duration and length
suggest that two communication regimes exist: a short
distance ‘face-to-face’ regime with short communication The duration and length of trips in urban areas is ob-
durations and a large clustering coefficient and another viously of great importance and in particular, daily trips
long-distance regime with smaller clustering and longer can characterize the economical efficiency of an urban
communications. area. In particular the duration of daily journey-to-work
tripsgiveagoodindicationoftheeconomicalhealthand
efficiencyofagivenregion. Formanydifferentreasons,it
C. Origin-destination matrix and mobility networks isthenimportanttounderstandthefactorsgoverningthe
behavior of the statistics of the daily trips. In particular
1. Importance of human mobility in the perspective of convergence to sustainable cities,
we need to understand such factors in order to reduce
Knowingtheflowsofindividualsfromonepointtothe energy and environmental problems. We are now at the
other in a city or a country is a very important piece stagewherealwaysmoredataisavailableanditwillsoon
of information upon which many models and studies de- become possible to characterize the statistics of human
pend. First, it is related to the fundamental problem in movements at many different scales and in particular at
geographyandspatialeconomicsofthelocationofactiv- the urban scale.
ities and their spatial distribution. Second, it is a key The important case of the statistics of the daily
ingredient in the epidemiology of infectious diseases (see journey-to-work travel is an old problem and discussed
section V.F). These diseases transmit between humans at length in the transportation research literature. One
in close proximity and contaminate the population be- can find various empirical observations for different ur-
cause they travel and interact. Clues on the statistics of ban areas (see for example [233] a short review on this
humansmovementsandinteractionsisthusfundamental. subject) and also some theoretical discussions (see for
Atagloballevelforexample,thespreadofinfectiousdis- example [233]). An important theoretical discussion was
eases such as the flu is – in addition to seasonal effects – triggered by Zahavi [330] who suggested that the aver-
largelycontrolledbyairtravelpatterns(see[91]andsec- age daily travel time at the regional scale varies little
tion V.F). Third, statistics about individual movements over space and time. This hypothesis is interesting in
are important for more commercial applications such as the sense that it is the first step towards some ‘physi-
geomarketingforexample. Findingthebestspottoplace cal laws’ ruling human movement. This hypothesis of
youradvertisementdependsonthenumberofpeoplego- a constant time (and money) budget can be rephrased
ing through this location and thus implies to know the as the ‘rational locator hypothesis’ states that individu-
flows,oratleastthedominantflowsofindividualsinthe als maintain (if they can choose) steady journey-to-work
area under consideration. travel times by adjusting their home-work distance (see
Asimplewaytoformalizethisproblemistodividethe for example [213].
25
KoelblandHelbing[196]proposedthatthetraveltime
can be understood in terms of a travel energy budget.
More precisely, they found emprically that the average
traveltimeforeachdailytransportationmodeconsidered
(walk, bicycle, car, bus, train) is approximately constant
for over 27 years (the data considered was obtained for
the UK in the period 1972−1998, see the end of this
chapter for a discussion on this point). This result sug-
gests that there is a travel time budget associated with
eachtransportationmodeandthemainideaputforward
in [196] is that the energy consumed by individuals for
travel is constant and mode-independent
E ≈t p (60)
i i
where E ≈ 615kJ is the estimated average daily energy
budget, t the average travel time for mode i, and p
i i
the energy consumption rate for mode i (which varies
from≈4kJ/minforatrainpassengerto≈15kJ/minfor
walking).
Afurtherobservationisthattheindividualtraveltime
(for a mode i) rescaled by the average time of the corre-
sponding mode τ = t/t follows a universal probability
i i
distribution which in terms of energy E = p t = Eτ
i i i
reads
P(E )∼e−αE/Ei−βEi/E (61)
i
where α and β are fitting parameters. This distribution
FIG.32 Universaltravelenergydistributionin(a)linearrep-
reflects the variation between individuals but displays a
resentation and in (b) semilogarithmic representation. The
universal behavior among modes. The collapse is shown
solid line is the fit obtained for α = 0.2 and β = 0.7. From
inFigure32. Theexponentialterme−βEi/E corresponds [196].
to the canonical energy distribution when the average
energy is fixed (and can be recovered by maximizing the
entropywiththenormalizationandthefixedaverageen- It is clear at this point that a ‘unified theory’ of hu-
ergy constraints). The term exp(−αE/E i) suppresses mantravelbehaviorisstillneededaswellasotherempir-
the short trips reflecting what is called the Simonson ef- ical studies, but the analysis presented in [196] at least
fect (see [196] and references therein) and leads to the showsthattoolsfromstatisticalphysicscanplayarolein
selection of a less costly transportation mode. Indeed transportationresearchandmoregenerallyinuncovering
if the trip is too short for a given transportation mode, universal patterns in human behavior.
the energy spent for preparation can be larger than the
energy needed for the trip itself and a less costly trans-
portation mode is then more efficient.
a. MobilephoneandGPSstudies. Asdiscussedabove,ob-
TheseresultsofKoelblandHelbinghavehoweverbeen taining OD matrices is a very difficult and crucial task.
challenged in other empirical studies. In [213], Levinson Whiletraditionalsurveysarecostlyandincomplete,mo-
and Wu showed that the average daily travel seems to bilephonedatagivemorecompleteinformations. Inpar-
be constant over time for a given city but varies from ticular, in large urban areas, the density of antennas is
one city to another. The average travel time for a given large enough so that triangulation gives a relatively ac-
city then depends on structural parameters character- curate indication of the users’ location (mobile devices
izing the city (such as population, density, transporta- suchasphonesareregularlyincontactwithemittersand
tion networks, congestion, etc). In another study [167] triangulation allows to determine the location of the de-
on three travel surveys (for France, UK, and Belgium), vice at a resolution scale given by the local density of
Hubert and Toint criticize the validity of the hypothe- emitters). For all these reasons, mobile phone data were
sis of constant average daily human energy expenditure recentlyusedtodetailindividualtrajectories[3],toiden-
Eq. 60. However, they show that the distribution of the tify‘anchorpoints’whereindividualsspendmostoftheir
normalizedtraveltimeseemstobethesameforthethree time[1,118], orstatisticsoftrippatterns[144,285]. Re-
different countries of this study pointing to the possible sultsandstudiesaresonumerousnow,thatwewillfocus
existence of universal features of human movement. on a small subset only and refer the interested reader to
26
[285] and references therein.
Gonzalez et al [144] used a set of mobile phone data
at a national level and found that the distribution of
displacement of all users can be fitted by a Levy law of
the form
1
P(∆r)∼ e−∆r/κ (62)
(∆r +∆r)β
0
where β (cid:39) 1.75, ∆r (cid:39) 1.5 km. The cutoff value κ
0
depends on the protocol used and varies from κ (cid:39) 400
kms (for protocol D ) and κ (cid:39) 80 kms for the protocol
1
D . The protocol D consists in recording trajectories
2 1
(of 100,000 users) when the user initiates or receives a
call or SMS. The protocol D captures the location of
2
206 mobile phones every two hours for an entire week.
The origin of the data is not indicated in this paper and FIG.33 Distributionoftotallengthofdailytrips. Theexpo-
inparticularcouldmixbothruralandurbanareaswhich nential fits gives a slope L 0 (cid:39)25kms. From [46].
could be the cause of the observed behavior. However,
thistypeofapproachisverypromisingandwillcertainly
leadinthefutureinterestinginsightsabouthumanmove- be uncovered. In particular, the authors suggest a re-
ment behavior in various areas. lation with this distribution and Maxwell distributions.
We note that the measured value for the exponent β This seems to be actually reminiscent of the general ar-
is not far from the value 1.6 observed in [64]. In this gument proposed by Koelbl and Helbing (see [196] and
study, Brockmann et al. used data for the movements of previous chapter III.C.2) and indeed points to the possi-
banknotes across the USA using the ‘Where is George’ bleexistenceofmoregeneralprinciplesgoverninghuman
database, a system based on voluntary reporting. They movements.
found that the distance distribution is also Levy dis-
tributed. However, the presence of a given banknote at
a given location and at a certain time depends on many b. RFIDs. Atanintra-urbanscaleandevenatthescale
processes such as the diffusion of the bills, but also on of social networks, RFIDs might provide interesting in-
the probability toactually use a banknote, and of course sights. RFID stands for Radio Frequency Identification
toreportitslocationtotheWhereisgeorges.comwebsite. and is a technology similar to the bar code and is com-
Such crucial factors were not taken into account in [64] posed of a tag which can interact with a transceiver that
and it is therefore difficult to assess the validity of the process all informations contained in the tag. RFIDs are
obtained Levy law. used in many different instances from tagging goods to
We note here that in a recent paper [290], Song et al. theOystercardsysteminLondon. Infactitcanbeused
proposed a model of human mobility in order to under- anywhere a unique id is needed and the tag can carry
standthepowerlawsobservedin[64,144]. Inparticular, simple or more complex information about the carrier.
this model includes the two following ingredients in the RFIDs can also be used for dynamical measures of so-
description human displacements: First, the tendency to cial networks such as in the sociopatterns project (see
exploreadditionallocationsdecreaseswithtime,andsec- http://www.sociopatterns.com).
ond, there is large probability to return a location vis- The Oyster card system in London provides informa-
ited before. This model gives relations between different tion about instantaneous flows of individuals in the sub-
scaling exponents and values which are consistent with way system. Since 2003, some 10 million RFID cards
empirical fits [290]. However, it is still unclear at this have been issued to commuters using the London trans-
stage at which scale this study applies and how it can portnetwork. In[270], theseindividualtrajectorieswere
bereconciledwiththepreviousstudiesshowingapeaked analyzed, displaying evidence for a polycentric organiza-
distribution of travel times. tion of activity in this urban area. These authors also
GPS is another interesting tool in order to charac- foundthatinagreementwithmanyothertransportation
terize individual trajectories. Recent studies [46, 262] networks, the traffic is broadly distributed (according to
usedGPSdataofprivatevehiclesforthecityofFlorence a power law with exponent ≈1.3) but also that the dis-
(Italy). and have shown that the total daily length trip placement length distribution is peaked (see Fig. 34).
is exponentially distributed (see Fig. 33)
P((cid:96) )∼e−(cid:96)T/L0 (63) 3. The gravity law
T
and seems to be independent of the structure of road Theorigin-destinationmatrixcontainsalargeamount
network pointing to a general mechanism which need to of information and allows to test some ideas about the
27
discussion on the gravity law.
a. Worldwide commuters. Balcan et al. [25] studied re-
cently flows of commuters at a global scale. They stud-
ied more than 104 commuting flow worldwide between
subpopulations defined by a Voronoi decomposition and
foundthatthebestfitisobtainedforagravitylawofthe
form
T =CPαPγe−dij/κ (66)
ij i j
where C is a proportionality constant, and where the
exponents are: for d ≤ 300 kms, (α,γ) (cid:39) (0.46,0.64),
κ = 82 kms, and for d > 300 kms: (α,γ) (cid:39) (0.35,0.37).
We note an asymmetry in the exponent at small scales
whichprobablyreflectsthedifferencebetweenhomesand
offices and which does not hold at large scale where ho-
mogenization seems to prevail.
At this granularity level, there is then a dependence
FIG.34 Ridedistancedistribution. (a)Plotofthehistogram of the traffic on populations and distances with specific
ofdistancesforobservedrides. Thisdistributioncanbefitted exponents and with exponentially decreasing deterrence
by a negative binomial law of parameters r = 2.61 and p = function. Atasmallerscale,differentresultsforUScom-
0.0273, corresponding to a mean µ=9.28 kms and standard muterswereobtainedin[304]andassuggestedin[25]the
deviation σ=5.83 kms. This distribution is not a broad law
observeddifferencesmightfoundtheirorigininthediffer-
(suchasaLevyflightforexample),incontrastwithprevious
ent granularities used in these studies (a problem known
findings using indirect measures of movements [64, 144]. (b)
as the ‘modifiable areal unit problem’ in geography). In-
Ride distance propensity. Propensity of achieving a ride at
deed, in [25], the granularity is defined by a Voronoi de-
a given distance with respect to a null-model of randomized
composition, while in [304], counties are used which are
rides. From [270].
administrative boundaries not necessarily well spatially
consistent with gravity centers of mobility processes.
structureofhumanmovements. Inparticular,ithasbeen
suggested (see for example the book [125]) more than 50
b. Korean highways. In [179], Jung, Wang, and Stanley
years ago that the number of trips from location i to
studied the traffic on the Korean highway system for
location j follows the ‘Gravity’ law
the year 2005. The system consists in 24 routes and
238 exits, and the total length of the system is about
P P
T =K i j (64) 3,000 kms. The highway network is described by a sym-
ij dσ
ij metrized weight matrix T which represents the traffic
ij
flow between i and j. The in- and out-traffic are well
where d = d (i,j) is the euclidean distance between
ij E correlated with population, as already seen in the world-
these two locations, P is the population at location i
i(j) wide airline network [91] where the population P of city
(j) and where σ is an exponent whose value actually de- i
i scales with the strength s as
pends on the system. This idea was generalized to many i
other situations such as the important case in economics P ∼sα (67)
of international trade [16, 49]. In this case, the volume i i
of trade between two countries is given in terms of their withα≈0.5whileitisclosetoonein[107]and[179]. For
economical activity and their distance. 30citieswithpopulationlargerthan200,000,Jungetal.
Moregenerallythegravitylaw(seethetheoreticaldis- study the traffic flow T as a function of the population
ij
cussioninthesectionIII.C.3.e)iswrittenundertheform of the two cities P and P , and the distance d between
i j ij
i and j and used the original formulation of the gravity
T ij ∼P iP jf(d(i,j)) (65) law
where the deterrence function f describes the effect of w ∼ P iP j (68)
space. ij dσ
ij
In the next sections, we will focus on the most recent
measures and concern highways [179], commuters [25], with σ =2 (see Fig. 35).
and cargo ship movements [185], and phone communica-
tions [200]. We then end this chapter with a theoretical
28
FIG. 35 Traffic flow between i and j as a function of the
variable P P /d2. The line has a slope equal to 1.02. From
i j ij
[179].
FIG. 36 (a) Histogram of port to port distances traveled in
the global cargo ship network. The red line represents the
c. Global cargo ship. In [185], Kaluza et al. applied the gravity model, the blue line a random null model. (b) Count
gravity law to the global cargo ship network. They used of port pairs with N observed and F predicted journeys.
ij ij
the general form of the gravity law, where the number From [185].
of trips T is given as (see the discussion in the section
ij
III.C.3.e)
inter-city communication intensity follows a gravity law
T =A B O I f(d ) (69)
ij i j i j ij
P P
L ∝ i j (70)
where O i is the total number of departures from node ij d E(i,j)2
i and I the total number of arrivals at node j. The
j
coefficients A and B are normalization prefactors such whereL isthetotalcommunicationtimebetweencities
i j ij
(cid:80) (cid:80)
that T =O and T =I . i and j (for a period of six months). This result showing
j ij i i ij j
a power law decay with exponent 2 is in agreement with
The deterrence function used in [185] is a two param-
eters truncated power law f(d) = d−σexp(−d/κ). The otherstudiesontheinfluenceofspaceonsocialnetworks
(see [205] and section III.B.4). More generally, going be-
best correlation was obtained for κ = 4,900 kms and
yond the topological structure of the social network and
σ = 0.59. As shown in Fig. 36, this fit compares ex-
including other socio-economical parameters is probably
tremelywellwiththeempiricaldata. Inordertotestthe
a very interesting research direction which will be devel-
dispersiononeverypairsoforigin-destination, Kaluzaet
oped in the future.
al. [185] plot the observed number N of trips between
ij
i and j with the prediction F obtained with the grav-
ij
ity model. A perfect agreement would give a diagonal
F ij = N ij and we observe here some dispersion (with a e. Theoreticaldiscussion. The problem of estimating the
small Kendall’s tau of τ = 0.433) showing that even if number of trips from one zone to another is an old prob-
the gravity law is able to reproduce the histogram, it is lem which excited the curiosity of many scientists a long
not accurate enough in order to predict the actual flow time ago. It is reasonable to think that the number of
between a given pair of origin and destination. tripsbetweentwolocationsiandj isproportionaltothe
number of possible contacts given by P P and also de-
i j
creaseswithdistance,orequivalentlywithtimeandmore
generally with the cost of travelling from i to j. Readers
d. Inter-city phone communications. Mobile phone data interested in theoretical developments of this model can
openanewwaytoanalyzegeographicalstructureatvar- find a full account in the book [125]. It is interesting to
iousscalesandinparticularallowstoexhibitspatialfea- note that in this book devoted to the gravity model and
turesofsocialnetworks. Inarecentpaper[200],Kringset which is one of the most cited reference in this field, all
al. studythenetworkofmobilephonecustomersandan- thechaptersaredevotedtotheoreticalandmathematical
alyze the geographical pattern of 2.5 millions customers. discussions without any attempt to compare the results
After aggregating by city, these authors found that the with empirical observations.
29
There are obviously many factors which control the isminimum. Thisistheclassicaltransportationproblem
origin-destination matrix: land use, location of indus- and can be traced back to the 18th century and Monge
tries and residential areas, accessibility, etc and it seems [125]. Another approach consists in requiring that T =
ij
difficult to provide a general and simple enough model. T0r s where T0 is a given set of interzonal weights and
ij i j
The gravity law in its simplest form retains the popula- where s and r are given constants. For an extensive
j i
tionandthedistanceasrelevantfactors(moreelaborated discussion on this latter approach, see [125].
forms with up to dozen of parameters were used in prac-
tical applications). However, given the importance of Entropy maximization
thislawformanypracticalapplicationsanditsextensive Interestingly enough, the gravity model can be shown
use in simulations (in epidemiology for example), we be- to result essentially from the maximization of entropy
lievethatanextensivemeta-analysisfordifferentmodes, [318]. Wilson, a physicist who got interested in trans-
geographical regions and granularities is greatly needed. portation research very early proposed that the trips T
ij
Thanks to the increasing availability of data, we can ex- are such that the quantity
pectinthefutureamoresystematicinvestigationofthis
problemandwetrytoprovidehereafirststepinthisdi- T!
Ω= (74)
rectionandweshowinTableIalistofvarious(essentially Π T !
ij ij
recent) results obtained empirically. As we can observe
inthistable,therearemultiplechoicesforthedeterrence is maximal which corresponds to trip arrangements with
functionandvariousvaluesoftheexponentaswell. Par- the largest number of equivalent configurations (or mi-
ticularly puzzling is the existence of different values for crostates in the statistical physics language). In this ex-
(cid:80)
the exponent σ (which can vary from ≈0.5 to ≈3) and pression,T = ijT ij isthenumberoftotaltripsandthe
the different deterrence function for commuters. As sug- maximizationissubjecttothenaturalconstraintsonthe
gested in [25] the observed differences might found their origin-destination matrix
origin in the different granularities used in these studies.
(cid:88)
Indeed,in[25],thegranularityisdefinedbyaVoronoide- T ij =T i (75)
composition, while in [304], counties are used which are j
administrative boundaries not necessarily spatially con- (cid:88)
T =T (76)
ij j
sistent with mobility processes (a problem known as the
i
modifiable areal unit problemingeography). Inaddition,
the different exponents could depend on the transporta- and to a cost constraint
tionmodeused,ofthescale,orothereffectslinkedtothe
(cid:88)
heterogeneity of users and trips. T ijC ij =C (77)
In this short discussion, we thought that it could be ij
useful to recall the classical optimization problem and
where C is the cost to travel from i to j and where C
ij
one of the most important derivation of the gravity law
is the total quantity of resources available. This max-
which uses entropy maximization and also to give a sim-
imization is easy to perform with the help of Lagrange
ple statistical argument which could shed light on the
multipliers and one obtains
most important mechanisms in this problem.
T =A B T T e−βCij (78)
ij i j i j
Optimization
where A , B and β are such that the constraints are
i j
We first recall the classical approach which is at the met. Of course, even if in this expression we do not have
basis of many studies (see for example [125]. We are explicit expressions of A and B , the most important
i j
interested in this problem in determining the OD matrix problematthispointishowtoexpressthecost. Inorder
T ij given the constraints torecoverapowerlawdistribution,oneneedsalogarith-
mic dependence on distance: C = alnd (i,j) which
(cid:88) ij E
T ij =T i (71) leads to T ij ∝ d E(i,j)−βa. If the cost is proportional to
j distance, the number of trips decays exponentially with
(cid:88) distance. We thus recover two of the most important
T =T (72)
ij j
forms used in empirical studies and in model, but the
i
exactform ofthe costdependencewith distanceremains
These represent 2N constraints for N2 unknowns and as unsolved.
longasN >2manydifferentchoicesforT arepossible. There is a long discussion about the validity of this
ij
If we assume that the transport from i to j has a cost approach in [125] but we note that it assumes in par-
C we can then choose T such that the total cost ticular that all individuals act independently from each
ij ij
other. This is obviously not correct when we introduce
(cid:88)
C = T C (73) congestion which induces correlations between individu-
ij ij
als. In such conditions, it is clear that individual choices
ij
30
Network [ref] N gravity law form Results
Railway express [337] 13 P P /dσ σ =1.0
i j ij
Korean highways [179] 238 P P /dσ σ =2.0
i j ij
Global cargo ship [185] 951 O I d−σexp(−d /κ) σ =0.59
i j ij ij
Commuters (worldwide) [25] n/a PαPγexp(−d /κ) (α,γ)=(0.46,0.64) for d<300 kms
i j ij
(α,γ)=(0.35,0.37) for d>300 kms
US commuters by county [304] 3109 PαPγ/dσ (α,γ,σ)=(0.30,0.64,3.05) for d<119 kms
i j ij
(α,γ,σ)=(0.24,0.14,0.29) for d>119 kms
Telecommunication flow [200] 571 P P d−σ σ =2.0
i j ij
TABLE I List of various empirical studies on the gravity law (we essentially focused on recent and illustrative results).
are correlated and that this entropy maximization can
give reasonable results in the limit of small traffic only.
A simple statistical argument
As proposed in [274], a statistical approach could be
helpful in the determination of important features of
roads and traffic and more generally can give insights
into the structure of cities. As discussed above, the ex-
actempiricalmeasureofT isextremelydifficultbutwe
ij
haveaccesstoamorecoarse-grainedinformationsuchas
for example the total number (cid:96) of miles driven in 357
d
US cities6. For a given city of total area A and popu-
lation P, it is natural to test for simple scalings such as
one observed in other systems [26, 317]. In particular,
the natural length scale for a city of area A is given by
√
A and we thus expect a scaling for (cid:96) of the form
d
(cid:96)
√d ∼Pβ (79)
A
As suggested in [274], we can explore two extreme cases
ofmobilityinurbanareas. Ifeveryindividualisgoingto
its next nearest neighbor (located at a typical distance
√ √
1/ ρ where ρ=P/A is the average density of the city), FIG.37 (a)Totalrescaledvehicule-miles(cid:96) / AversusN for
d
the total distance (cid:96) d is given by 357 US cities. The line is a power law fit with exponent β =
0.60 (the correlation coefficient is r2 = 0.94).(b) Exponent
1 √ β versus τ. The red diamond corresponds to the empirical
(cid:96) =P × √ = AP (80)
d ρ measure β ≈0.6 predicting τ ≈1.8.
√
implying that (cid:96) / A scales as Pβ with β =1/2.
d
On the other hand, if the individuals are going to ran- 0.66foraslightlylargerdataset)withanexcellentcorre-
dom points in the city, the typical distance is given by lation coefficient. We are thus in an intermediate situa-
√
A and the total vehicle miles is given by tion between the two extremes described above showing
thatthecommutingpatternisprobablyamixtureofcen-
√
(cid:96) ∼P × A (81) tralized trips (to a central business district for example)
d
andmorelocaltrips,orcouldalsoresultfromcentralized
which implies β =1. patterns to many different centers and could thus be a
Following[274],weplotinFig.37athetotalnumber(cid:96) signature of a polycentric organization.
d
ofmilesdriv √enbythewholepopulationP ofthecityand Thetotalnumberofmilesofbuiltl √aneswasalsostud-
rescaled by A for all the 367 US cities in the database. ied in [274] and essentially scales as PA which means
We obtain the result β (cid:39) 0.6 (in [274] this exponent is that the road network is essentially a lattice of spac-
√
ing 1/ ρ in agreement with the results shown in section
III.B.1.a.
Usinghand-wavingarguments,wecanexplorethecon-
6 Source: http://www.census.gov sequences of this empirical result β (cid:39)0.6 on the general
31
properties of the trip distribution. Since T is the num- had an exponential behavior we would have observed a
ij
ber of trips from a zone i to a zone j, the total distance value τ > 2 but instead the simple argument presented
traveled is given by here suggests the behavior
(cid:88) 1
(cid:96) d = T ijd ij (82) T ij ∼ dτ (92)
i,j ij
and we can assume that total number of trips is propor- with τ = 1.8 slightly less than 2. This simple scaling
tional to the total number of individuals argument leads to a result in agreement with the gravity
law and signals a slow decay of the trip volume with dis-
(cid:88)
P = T ij (83) tanceandthesimultaneousexistenceoftripsatmanydif-
i,j ferent length scales. Aggregated and scaling arguments
could thus help in understanding the commuting pat-
(intheseequations(82)and(83)someirrelevantconstant terns, and reveal interesting features of spatial patterns
factorsareomitted). Thesimplestassumptionisthatthe in the city.
trip distribution depends on the distance T = f(d )
ij ij Various factors could be at the origin of the different
and we can assume that f(x) = Cx−τ. This is in fact a
behaviorsobservedingravitylawstudies(differentdeter-
very general case, as the exponential case is in a statisti-
rent functions, different exponents, etc.). In particular,
cal sense reproduced by this form with α>2.
we can list the following factors which could play an im-
We will assume that the distance is uniformly dis-
portant role:
tributedandweconsiderthecontinuouslimitwhichreads
• Importance of transportation modes. It is at this
(cid:90) L
P = (cid:88) f(d )(cid:39)C x−τdx (84) point unclear if the gravity law is the same for all
ij
ij a modes. Also, the cost of a given transportation
mode can vary in time (which was the case for air
(cid:90) L
(cid:88)
(cid:96) = f(d )d (cid:39)C x1−τdx (85) travel when jets appeared and is the case for cars
d ij ij
ij a withincreasingoilprices)andthegravitylawcould
in principle vary in time.
√
where a is the smallest distance given by a ∼ 1/ ρ ∼
√
• Importance of scale and discretization. As dis-
L/ P and where the upper bound is the maximum dis-
√
cussed in this chapter, it is important to use a dis-
tance L∼ A. We have to separate three cases depend-
cretization which is consistent with mobility pro-
ing on the value of τ (in the following we will keep the
cesses. Also, a discussion of scale is probably im-
dominant terms, knowing that a(cid:28)L).
portantasitcanalreadybeseenonthetriplength
(i) Case τ <1. In this case, the leading terms are distribution which seems to display peaked laws at
the urban scale and broad distribution at national
(cid:96) ∼ CL2−τ (86) scales.
d
P ∼ CL1−τ (87) • Nature of the trip. Heterogeneity of users. These
√ factors are well-known in transportation research,
leading to (cid:96) d ∼P A. and it could be necessary to distinguish different
trips (commuting, travel, etc.) in order to get con-
(ii) Case 1 < τ < 2. In this case, the dominant terms
sistent gravity laws. Users are also very heteroge-
are neous and it is unclear at this stage if we need to
distinguish between different populations with dif-
(cid:96) ∼CL2−τ (88)
d ferent behaviors.
P ∼Ca1−τ (89)
√
leading to (cid:96) d ∼P3− 2τ A. D. Neural networks
(iii) Case τ >2. In this case, the dominant terms are
The human brain with about 1010 neurons and about
1014 connectionsisoneofthemostcomplexnetworkthat
(cid:96) d ∼Ca2−τ (90) we know of. The structure and functions of the brain
P ∼Ca1−τ (91) are the subjects of numerous studies and different recent
√ techniques such as electroencephalography, magnetoen-
leading to (cid:96) ∼ PA. cephalography, functional RMI, etc., can be used in or-
d
These results can be summarized in the Fig. 37b. In dertoproducenetworksforthehumanbrain(seeFig.38
particular, we can see on this plot that the empirical andforaclearandniceintroductionseeforexample[68]
result β = 0.6 corresponds to the value τ = 1.8. If we and [80]).
32
logarithmic behavior would predict a ratio
(cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105)(N =4000) log(4000)
r = ∼ ≈1.20 (93)
(cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105)(N =1000) log(1000)
whilea3-dimensionalspatialbehaviorwouldgivearatio
of order r ≈ 41/3 ≈ 1.6 which is closer to the observed
value. Larger sets would however be needed in order to
besureaboutthebehaviorofthisnetworkconcerningthe
average shortest path and to distinguish a logN from a
N1/3 behavior expected for a three-dimensional lattice.
Things are however more complex than it seems
and even if functional connectivity correlates well with
anatomical connectivity at an aggregate level, a recent
study [162] shows that strong functional connections ex-
istbetweenregionswithnodirectstructuralconnections,
demonstrating that structural and functional properties
of neural networks are entangled in a complex way and
FIG.38 Structuralandfunctionalbrainscanbestudiedwith thatfuturestudiesareneededinordertounderstandthis
graph theory by following different methods shown step-by- extremely complex system.
step in this figure. From [68].
E. Summary: Existence of general features
Throughthedifferentexamplespresentedinthischap-
Brain regions that are spatially close have a larger ter, we see that some general features emerge. Space
probability of being connected than remote regions as implies a cost associated to distance and the formation
longer axons are more costly in terms of material and of long links must be justified for a ‘good economical’
energy [68]. Wiring costs depending on distance is thus reason, such as a large degree for example. This simple
certainly an important aspect of brain networks and we observation leads to various effects that we summarize
canexpectspatialnetworkstoberelevantinthisrapidly here.
evolving topic. So far, many measures seem to confirm In the table II, we summarize the main empirical fea-
a large value of the clustering coefficient, and a small- tures discussed in this chapter.
worldbehaviorwithasmallaverageshortest-pathlength
[120, 182]. It also seems that neural networks do not • Network typology
optimize the total wiring length but rather the process- We can roughly divide spatial networks in two cat-
ing paths thanks to shortcuts [183]. This small world egories. The first one consists in planar networks.
structure of neural networks could reflect a balance be- These networks possess many features similar to
tween local processing and global integration with rapid lattices but in some cases (such as the road net-
synchronization, information transfer, and resilience to work) display very distinctive features which call
damage [204]. for new models. The other category consists in
spatial,non-planarnetworkssuchastheairlinenet-
work,thecargoshipnetwork,ortheInternetwhere
Incontrast,thenatureofthedegreedistributionisstill
nodes are located in spaces, edges have a cost re-
under debate and a recent study on the macaque brain
lated to their length, but where we can have in-
[232] showed that the distribution is better fitted by an
tersecting links. We note here that in some cases
exponentialratherthanabroaddistribution. Besidesthe
such as for the Internet, the point distribution is
degree distribution, most of the observed features were
not always uniform and could play an important
confirmed in latest studies such as [331] where Zalesky
role.
et al. propose to construct the network with MRI tech-
niques where the nodes are distinct grey-matter regions
• Effect of space on P(k)
and links represent the white-matter fiber bundles. The
Spatial constraints restrict the appearance of large
spatialresolutionisofcoursecrucialhereandthelargest
degrees and P(k) is usually peaked. Constraints
network obtained here is of size N ≈ 4,000. These au-
arestrongerforplanarnetworksandfornon-planar
thors find a large clustering coefficients with a ratio to
spatial networks such as airlines the degree distri-
the corresponding random graph value of order 102 (for
bution can be broad.
N ≈4,000). Resultsfortheaverageshortestpathlength
(cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105) are however not so clear due to relatively low values • Effect of space on the link distribution
of N. Indeed, for N varying from 1,000 to 4,000, (cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105) Here also the spatial constraints limit severely the
varies by a factor of order 1.7−1.8 [331]. A small-world length of links. For planar networks such as roads
33
Network [ref.] N (cid:104)k(cid:105) (cid:104)C(cid:105) (cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105) P(k); P(w) β µ
Transportation networks
Chinese Airline network [216] 128 18.2 0.733 2.1 unclear; broad n/a n/a
Indian Airline network [22] 79 5.77 0.66 2.3 PL (2.2); broad 1.4 n/a
USA Airline network [105] 935 8.4 n/a 4.0 PL (1.9); broad 1.7 1.2∗
Global Airline network [146] 3883 6.7 0.62 4.4 PL (2.0); n/a n/a n/a∗
Global Airline network [29] 3880 9.7 n/a 4.4 PL (1.8); broad 1.5 n/a∗
Boston Subway [207] 124 n/a n/a 15.5 n/a; n/a n/a n/a
Seoul Subway [211] 380 2.23 n/a 20.0 n/a ; broad n/a n/a
Beijing Subway [323] 132 3.2 0.15 12.6 peaked; peaked 1.1 n/a
Shanghai Subway [323] 151 4.6 0.21 7.1 peaked; peaked 1.1 n/a
Nanjing Subway [323] 47 2.9 0.09 12.4 peaked; peaked 1.1 n/a
Polish transportation [286] [152,1530] [2.48,3.08] [0.055,0.161] [6.83,21.52] peaked; n/a n/a ≈2.0
World cities Subway [305] [2024,44629] [2.18,3.73] ∼10−2 [6.4,52] peaked; n/a n/a 2−3
Polish Rail [203] 1533 2.4 0.0092 28.1 peaked; broad n/a n/a
Swiss Rail [203] 1613 2.1 0.0004 46.6 peaked; broad n/a n/a
European Rail [203] 4853 2.4 0.0129 50.9 peaked; broad n/a n/a
Indian Rail [283] 587 2.4 0.69 2.2 peaked; n/a n/a n/a
China Cargo ship [324] 162 3.1 0.54 5.9 k <20; broad n/a 1.0∗∗
Worldwide Cargo ship [165] 878 9.0 0.40 3.60 PL (0.95); PL (0.9) 1.3 1.66∗∗
Worldwide Cargo ship [185] 951 76.5 0.49 2.5 broad; PL (1.7) 1.46 n/a∗∗
Mobility networks
Location network [82] 181206 29.9 0.058 3.1 PL (2.4); broad ≈1.0 n/a
Commuters Sardinia [107] 375 86.6 0.26 2.0 peaked; PL (1.8) 1.9 n/a
Infrastructure networks
Road network [66] [45,339] [2.02,2.87] M ∈[0.009,0.211] [4.6,13.6] peaked; n/a n/a n/a
Road network [73] [32,2870] [2.09,3.38] M ∈[0.014,0.348] [27.6,312.1] peaked; n/a n/a n/a
Power grid [101] 341 3.03 n/a n/a k <12; n/a n/a n/a∗
Power grid [313] 4941 2.67 0.08 18.7 peaked; n/a n/a n/a
Water network [326] 1786 2.23 0.0008 25.94 peaked; n/a n/a n/a
Water network [326] 872 2.19 0.0402 51.44 peaked; n/a n/a n/a
Internet [303] 3700−10500 3.6−4.1 0.21−0.29 3.7 PL (2.1); n/a n/a n/a
Biological networks
Human brain [120] 31503 13.4 0.14 11.4 PL (∼2.0); n/a n/a n/a
Human brain [120] 17174 6.3 0.13 12.9 PL (∼2.1); n/a n/a n/a
Human brain [120] 4891 4.1 0.15 6.0 PL (∼2.2); n/a n/a n/a
C. Elegans [313] 282 7.7 0.28 2.65 peaked; n/a n/a n/a
C. Elegans [183] 277 15.2 0.167 4.0 n/a; n/a n/a n/a
Macaque VC [157] 32 9.9 0.55 1.8 peaked; n/a n/a n/a
Macaque [183] 95 50.6 0.643 1.9 n/a; n/a n/a n/a
Cat Cortex [157] 65 17.5 0.54 1.9 peaked; n/a n/a n/a
TABLEII Listofdifferentnetworkswiththeirmaincharacteristics: numberofnodesN;averagedegree(cid:104)k(cid:105);averageclustering
coefficient (cid:104)C(cid:105); average shortest path (cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105); the nature of the degree and weight distributions P(k), P(w); the scaling of the
strength with the degree s(k)∼kβ; and the relation between the centrality and the degree when it exists g(k)∼kµ. ‘PL(x)’
means that a power law fit was measured and x is the value of the exponent. ∗ existence of many anomalies and ∗∗ few
anomalies. For road networks M denotes the meshedness (denoted by γ in section II.B.2.b).
and streets, the distribution is peaked while in alsofavortheformationofcliquesbetweenspatially
other networks such as the Internet or the airline close nodes and thus increase the clustering coeffi-
network, the distribution can be broader. cient.
• Effect of space embedding on clustering and assor- • Effect of space on the average shortest path
tativity The average shortest path for 2d planar networks
Spatial constraints implies that the tendency to scalesasN1/2 asinaregularlattice. Whenenough
connecttohubsislimitedbytheneedtousesmall- shortcuts(suchasintheWatts-Strogatzmodel)are
√
range links which explains the almost flat behav- present,this N behaviorismodifiedandbecomes
iorobservedfortheassortativity. Connectioncosts logarithmic. In some three-dimensional situations
34
suchasinthebrainforexample,itishoweverdiffi- IV. MODELS OF SPATIAL NETWORKS
cult in some experiments to distinguish between a
logN from a N1/3 behavior. In this chapter we will describe the most important
models of spatial networks. We basically divide these
models into five large classes (which of course could
• Effect of spatial embedding on topology-traffic cor- present non empty overlaps):
relations
• Thefirstclassdescribesgeometricgraphswhichare
Spatial constraints induce strong non-linear cor-
probably the simplest models of spatial networks.
relations between topology, traffic, and distance.
Theyareobtainedforasetofverticeslocatedinthe
The reason for this behavior is that spatial con-
plane and for a set of edges which are constructed
straints favor the formation of regional hubs and
according to some geometric condition. There is
reinforceslocallythepreferentialattachment,lead-
a large body of literature on this rather general
ing for a given degree to a larger strength than
subject and we will here focus on a small set of
the one observed without spatial constraints. Es-
these studies that concern more precisely graph
sentiallylong-rangelinkscanconnecttohubsonly,
constructedwithanEuclideanproximitycondition.
which yields a value β >1. The existence of con-
d
straints such as spatial distance selection induces
• The second class concerns the Erdos-Renyi model
somestrongcorrelationsbetweentopology(degree)
and its spatial generalization, including the spatial
and non-topological quantities such as weights or
hidden variables models. These networks are ob-
distances.
tained when the probability to connect two nodes
depends on the distance between these nodes. An
important example of this class is the Waxman
• Effect of space embedding on centrality
model [314] for the Internet structure.
Spatial constraints also induce large betweenness
centralityfluctuations. Whilehubsareusuallyvery • The third class comprises spatial variants of the
central,whenspaceisimportantcentralnodestend Watts-Strogatz model [313] and could be coined as
to get closer to the gravity center of all points. spatial small-worlds. In these cases, the starting
Correlations between spatial position and central- point is a d-dimensional lattice and random links
itycompetewiththeusualcorrelationsbetweende- are added according to a given probability distri-
gree and centrality, leading to large fluctuations of bution for their length.
centrality at fixed degree.
• The fourth class concerns spatial growth models
which can be considered as spatial extensions of
• Structure of mobility networks the original growth model proposed by Barabasi
The different discussions and empirical examples and Albert [8].
considered in this chapter showed that the average
• Finally, the last class concerns optimal networks
trip duration and length distribution actually de-
obtained by the minimization of a ‘cost’ function.
pend on many factors such as the scale considered
Thesenetworkswereconsideredalreadyalongtime
(urban,inter-urban,national,orglobal),thepopu-
agoindifferentfields(mathematics,transportation
lation, congestion, or on the transportation mode,
science, computer science) and are now back with
etc. Also, it seems that at the urban scale the trip
the explosion of studies on complex networks.
duration and length distributions are peaked law
and that at a larger scale the trip length is dis-
tributedaccordingtoabroadlawwithexponentof
A. Geometric graphs
order1.6. Theidentificationofrelevantfactorsand
the constitution of a clear typology is however still Arandomgeometricgraphisobtainedwhenthepoints
an open problem and we can expect in the future located in the plane are connected according to a given
a wealth of new results in this area. geometric rule. The simplest rule is a proximity rule
whichstatesthatnodesonlywithinacertaindistanceare
connected. Thereisanextensivemathematicalliterature
Although many results and measures are missing due on geometric graph and the random case was studied by
to the lack of data availability, we see that the main ex- physicists in the context of continuum percolation (see
pected effects of spatial constraints are present for most for example [24, 261]).
ofthesenetworks. Also, trafficpropertiesseemtoberel-
atively ubiquitous, with a broad traffic distribution, and
a non-linear strength-degree law with exponent β dis- 1. The simplest random geometric graph
tributed around 1.5. In the next chapter, we will discuss
thevariousmodelswhichattempttoreproducethesedif- In the framework of complex networks, one of the first
ferent effects. studies on random geometric graphs is provided in [104]
35
critical average degree above which there is a non empty
giantcomponent. Theauthorsof[104]computednumer-
ically this critical value (cid:104)k(cid:105) for different dimensions and
c
proposed the scaling (cid:104)k(cid:105) = 1+bd−γ with b = 11.78(5)
c
and γ = 1.74(2). This relation also states that in infi-
nite dimension the random geometric graph behaves like
a ER graph with (cid:104)k(cid:105) =1.
c
In [156], the authors compute analytically the degree
distribution for these random geometric graphs. If we
assumethatthepointsaredistributedaccordingtoadis-
tribution p(x) and the condition for connecting to nodes
i and j located at positions x and x , respectively, is
i j
d (i,j) ≤ R, we can then estimate the degree distribu-
E
tion. If we denote by B (x) the ball of radius R and
R
centered at x, the probability q (x) that a given node is
R
FIG. 39 Example of a 2d random geometric graph obtained
located in B (x) is
R
for N =500 spheres and (cid:104)k(cid:105)=5. From [104].
(cid:90)
q (x)= dx(cid:48)p(x(cid:48)) (96)
R
BR(x)
where the nodes are small spheres of radius r and two
nodes are connected by an edge if they are separated by The degree distribution for a node located at x is thus
adistancelessthan2r (whichistheconditionforthein- given by the binomial distribution
tersectionofspheresofradiusr). Thisnetworkisrelated
(cid:18) (cid:19)
N −1
totheunitdiskgraphdefinedingeometricgraphtheory, P(k;x,R)= q (x)k[1−q (x)]N−1−k (97)
as the intersection graph of a family of unit circles in k R R
the Euclidean plane: if we draw a vertex at the center of
In the limit N →∞ and R→0, the degree distribution
each circle, we connect two vertices if the corresponding
for a node located at x is Poissonian and reads
circles intersect. This unit disk graph has been used in
computer science to model the topology of ad-hoc wire- 1
less communication networks where the nodes are wire- P(k;x,α)= αkp(x)ke−αp(x) (98)
k!
lessly connected to each other, without a base station
[168]. The nodes are located in a two-dimensional plane where α = (cid:104)k(cid:105)/(cid:82) dxp2(x) fixes the scale of the average
andtheareawithinwhichasignalcanbetransmittedto degree. For example this expression gives for a uniform
another node is described as a circle (of the same radius density p(x)=p a degree distribution of the form
0
ifallnodeshavethesamepowertotransmit). Theseran-
dom geometric graphs have also been used in continuum (αp )k
P(k)∼ 0 (99)
percolation models [24, 261]. k!kd
If the volume of the total system is 1 then the proba-
which decays very rapidly with k. In contrast if the den-
bility p that two randomly chosen vertices are connected
sity decays slowly from a point as p(r) ∼ r−β we then
is equal to the volume of the sphere of radius R = 2r
obtain P(k)∼k−d/β showing that large density fluctua-
which reads in d dimensions
tions can lead to spatial scale-free networks [156].
πd/2Rd
p=V(R)= (94)
Γ(1+d/2) The average clustering coefficient can also be calcu-
lated analytically and the argument [104] is the follow-
In the context of continuum percolation this quantity is
ing. If two vertices i and j are connected to a vertex k
the excluded volume V ≡p. The average degree is then
e it means that they are both in the excluded volume of
given by (cid:104)k(cid:105)=Np and we can then express R as a func-
k. Now, these vertices i and j are connected only if j is
tion of (cid:104)k(cid:105)
in the excluded volume of i. Putting all pieces together,
the probability to have two connected neighbors (ij) of
1
(cid:20)
(cid:104)k(cid:105)
(cid:18) d+2(cid:19)(cid:21)1/d
a node k is given by the fraction of the excluded volume
R= √ Γ (95)
π N 2 of i which lies within the excluded volume of k. By av-
eraging over all points i in the excluded volume of k we
whichshowsthatforagivenaveragedegree(cid:104)k(cid:105)thenodes then obtain the average clustering coefficient. We thus
(spheres) have to become smaller when more nodes are have to compute the volume overlap ρ of two spheres
d
added. which for spherical symmetry reasons depends only on
Similarly to the usual ER random graph, there is a the distance between the two spheres. In terms of this
36
function, the clustering coefficient is given by a. Application to ad-hoc networks: Calculation of the giant
component. In ad-hoc networks [242], users communi-
1 (cid:90)
cate by means of a short range radio device. This means
(cid:104)C (cid:105)= ρ (r)dV (100)
d V e Ve d that a device can communicate with another one if their
distanceislessthanacertaindistancewhichcorresponds
For d=1, we have to the transmission range of the device. The set of con-
nected devices can be used to propagate information on
ρ (r)=(2R−r)/2R=1−r/2R (101)
1 longer distance by going from the source to the destina-
tionhopbyhopthroughintermediatenodes. Ifthereisa
and we obtain
largedensityofnodes,alternateroutesareevenavailable
which allows to split the information into separate flows.
(cid:104)C (cid:105)=3/4 (102)
1
Usually, the users are mobile and the network evolves in
For d=2, we have to determine the area overlapping in time and it is important to understand the condition for
the Fig. 40 which gives the existence of a giant cluster.
In [242], Nemeth and Vattay explicitly compute the
ρ 2(r)=(θ(r)−sin(θ(r)))/π (103) condition for the appearance of a giant component using
generating functions such as in [248]. In particular, it is
with θ(r)=2arccos(r/2R) and leads to
not difficult to show that the fraction S of nodes which
√ are in the giant component is given by
(cid:104)C (cid:105)=1−3 3/4π ≈0.58650 (104)
2
S =1−G (u) (106)
0
Similarly an expression can be derived in d dimension
where the generating function G (x) is given by
0
(cid:88)
G (x)= P(k)xk (107)
0
k
where P(k) is the probability that a node has k neigh-
bors. The quantity u is the probability of not belonging
to the giant component and satisfies
u=G (u) (108)
1
where G (x)=G(cid:48)(x)/G(cid:48)(1) (see for example [32]).
1 0 0
In the ad-hoc network case, the typical internode dis-
tance r depends on the density ρ=N/A as
0
FIG.40 Theoverlapbetweenthetwodisks(areacomprised ρπr2 ∼1 ⇒ r ∼1/√ πρ (109)
within the bold line) gives the quantity ρ (r). From [104]. 0 0
2
The range of the radio devices is denoted by r and the
T
[104] which for large d reduces to (cid:112)
importantdimensionlessparameterishere r /r . The
T 0
probability to have k neighbors is a binomial law of pa-
(cid:114) (cid:18) (cid:19)d+1
2 3 2 rameter ρπr2 = η and in the limit of large N (with Nη
(cid:104)C (cid:105)∼3 (105) T
d πd 4 constant) we thus obtain
The average clustering coefficient thus decreases from ηk
the value 3/4 for d = 1 to values of order 10−1 for d of P(k)=e−η k! (110)
order 10 and is independent from the number of nodes
which is in sharp contrast with ER graphs for which This particular form of P(k) allows to compute G 0(x)
(cid:104)C(cid:105) ∼ 1/N. Random geometric graphs are thus much andG 1(x)andweeventuallyobtainanimplicitequation
more clustered than random ER graphs. The main rea- for S
son – which is in fact valid for most spatial graphs – is
S =1−e−ηS (111)
that long links are prohibited or rare. This fact implies
thatifbothiandjareconnectedtokitmeansthatthere
Or, after inversion
areinsomespatialneighborhoodofkwhichincreasesthe
probability that their inter-distance is small too, leading
−log(1−S)
to a large (cid:104)C(cid:105). η = (112)
S
This last relation gives the minimum transmission rate
37
in order to get a giant component of size NS. to the average degree at distance r (for large R)
Also,inthismodelonecanintroduceaprobabilityp(r)
4
thatthedevicesareconnectedatdistancer anddifferent (cid:104)k(cid:105)(r)≈ Ne−r/2 (116)
quantities such as the average clustering coefficient can π
be computed (see [242] for details).
The average degree of the network is then
(cid:90) R 8
(cid:104)k(cid:105)= ρ(r)(cid:104)k(cid:105)(r)dr ≈ Ne−R/2 (117)
b. Model of mobile agents for contact networks. A model
π
for contact networks based on mobile agents was pro- 0
posed in [141–143]. In this model, individuals are de- The degree distribution is [201]
scribed by disks with the same radius and are moving
and colliding in a two-dimensional space. The contact (cid:18) (cid:104)k(cid:105)(cid:19)2 Γ(k−2,(cid:104)k(cid:105)/2)
network is built by keeping track of the collisions (a link P(k)=2 ≈k−3 (118)
2 k!
connects two nodes if they have collided) . A collision
takesplacewhenevertwoagentsareatacertaindistance and behaves as a power law with an exponent equal to
andthismodelcanthusbeseenasadynamicalversionof three, as in the BA model. This network heterogeneity
randomgeometricgraphs. Inparticular,Gonzalez,Lind, howeverfollowsdirectlyfromthepropertiesofthehyper-
Herrmann [142] used this framework to model the sex- bolic geometry and not from a preferential attachment
ual interaction network and interestingly enough, found mechanism.
in some cases and for a simple collision rule such that
thevelocitygrowswiththenumberofpreviouscollisions Krioukovetal. alsoconsideredthecasewherethenode
that a scale-free network with exponent γ =3 emerges. density is not uniform
sinhαr
ρ(r)=α ≈eαr (119)
coshαR−1
2. Random geometric graph in hyperbolic space
Inthiscase, itcanbeshownthatthedegreedistribution
Motivated by studies on the Internet, a model of ran-
is also a power law of the form
dom geometric graph in hyperbolic space was proposed
recently (see [284] or the small review article [201]). In P(k)∼k−γ (120)
their studies, Bogun˜´a, Krioukov and Serrano considered
thetwo-dimensionalhyperbolicspaceH2ofconstantneg- where
ative curvature equal to K =−ζ2 =−1 and use a polar
(cid:40)
representation(r,θ)forthenodes. TheyplacedN points 1+2α/ζ for α ≥1/2
γ = ζ (121)
distributeduniformlyinadiskofradiusRandintheEu- 2 for α ≤1/2
ζ
clidean disk projection this implies that the nodes have
a uniform angle distribution U(θ) = 1/2π for θ ∈ [0,2π] The power law exponent depends then both on the hy-
andthattheradialcoordinateisdistributedaccordingto perbolicity ζ and α, through the ratio α/ζ, a result ex-
pected from an analogy with trees (see [201]). We thus
sinhr
ρ(r)= ≈er (113) obtainnaturallyscale-freenetworksasrandomgeometric
coshR−1 graphsonhyperbolicspacesandconversely,itcanalsobe
shown that scale-free networks can result from a hidden
They used then the usual geometric graph rule and con-
hyperbolic metric [201].
nect two nodes if their hyperbolic distance is less than R
which can be written in terms of the connection proba-
In line with random geometric graphs in euclidean
bility as
space, there is also a strong clustering for these graphs
constructed on hyperbolic space (unfortunately the clus-
p (x)=Θ(R−x) (114)
C tering coefficient cannot be computed analytically).
where Θ is the Heaviside function. The hyperbolic dis-
Finally, the authors of [201] extended their model and
tance d between two nodes (r,θ) and (r(cid:48),θ(cid:48)) is defined
introduce an inverse ‘temperature’ β akin to usual sta-
by
tistical mechanics in the connection probability
coshζd=coshζrcoshζr(cid:48)−sinhζrsinhζr(cid:48)cos(θ(cid:48)−θ)
(cid:16) (cid:17)−1
(115) p C(x)= 1+eβ(ζ/2)(x−R) (122)
The expected degree of a node at point X located at
distance r from the origin O is proportional to the area and showed that this H2 model reproduces well the In-
oftheintersectionofthetwodisksofradiusRcenteredat ternet measurements for P(k), the assortativity k (k),
nn
O and X, respectively. The disk centered at O contains and the clustering coefficient C(k) for α = 0.55, ζ = 1
all nodes and the intersection can be calculated leading and β =2.
38
distance (cid:96) from a given site. For large λ these chemical
shells are concentric (as in the case of a regular lattice)
while for smaller λ the presence of long links destroys
this order. Scaling arguments proposed in [271] suggest
that the minimal length exponent is given by
λ−2
d = (125)
min λ−1−1/d
This network has then the curious property to have a
fractal dimension which stays identical to the euclidean
dimension,butwithaminimallengthexponentd <1
min
for all λ and d>1.
Theauthorsof[310]studiedthepercolationproperties
of such a model and found that for these spatial scale-
free networks with a degree distribution P(k) ∼ k−λ,
thepercolationthresholdinthelimitofinfinitenetworks
does not go towards zero (for λ > 2), in sharp contrast
withnon-spatialscale-freenetworkwhichhavep =0for
c
λ<3 (and N =∞).
FIG. 41 Spatial structure of the network obtained by the
methodproposedin[271]fordifferentvaluesoftheexponent In a non-spatial scale-free network, there are many
λ of degree distribution. In (a) the networks are shown and shortpathsbetweenthedifferenthubsofthesystemeas-
in (b) the corresponding chemical shells of equidistant sites ing the percolation. In contrast, for spatial (scale-free)
form the central node. From [271]. networks there is a high local clustering due to the lim-
ited range of links which naturally lengthen the distance
between hubs. This negative assortativity makes it thus
3. A scale-free network on a lattice more difficult to achieve percolation in such a system
hence the existence of a non-zero threshold. As noted in
AswesawinthesectionIV.A.1geometricgraphscon- [310], the spread of a disease too would be easier to con-
structedonuniformlydistributedpointsnaturallyleadto trol than on a scale-free network (see section V.F) which
networkswithdegreesdistributedaccordingtoaPoisson isexpectedasspatialcontainmentisusuallyeasiertoset
distribution. It is however interesting to generate spa- up.
tialgraphswithabroaddistribution(scale-freenetwork)
in order to understand the effect of strong heterogeneity
on spatial networks. In [271], Rozenfeld et al. proposed
a simple method to construct a scale-free network on a
lattice (and in [310] another variant is suggested). This
model is defined on a d-dimensional lattice of linear size 4. Apollonian networks
Randwithperiodicboundaryconditions. Arandomde-
gree k is assigned to each node on this lattice according
to the probability distribution Other models were proposed in order to obtain a spa-
tial scale-free network. In particular, Apollonian net-
P(k)=Ck−λ (123) workswereintroducedbyAndradeetal. [178]wherethey
constructed a scale-free network (Fig. 42) from a space-
The idea is then simple: we connect a randomly chosen fillingpackingofspheresandbyconnectingthecentersof
node i to all its neighbors until its degree reaches its touchingspheresbylines. Thesenetworksaresimultane-
assigned value k . The larger k and the larger the region ously planar, scale-free (with exponent γ =1+ln3/ln2,
i
contained connected neighbors. The size of this region is small-world-infact‘ultra-small’withanaverageshortest
then given by path varying as
r(k)=Ak1/d (124) (cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105)∼(logN)3/4 (126)
where the prefactor A essentially depends on the density and a clustering coefficient larger than 0.8 for large N.
of nodes. We show in Fig. 41 the obtained networks for VariousquantitiesfortheApolloniannetworkandoneof
two different values of λ. The larger λ and the shorter itsvariantarealsocomputedanddiscussedin[333,334].
the links (large k and therefore long links are very rare) Duetoallthesesimultaneousproperties,Apolloniannet-
and the closer we are to a regular lattice. We can define works provide an interesting playground to test theoret-
a chemical shell (cid:96) as consisting of all sites at minimal ical ideas.
39
probability distribution P(k) it can be shown (see for
example [32]) that the average clustering coefficient is
1 ((cid:104)k2(cid:105)−(cid:104)k(cid:105))2
(cid:104)C(cid:105)= (130)
N (cid:104)k(cid:105)3
and that the average shortest path
logN/(cid:104)k(cid:105)
(cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105)≈1+ (131)
log(cid:104)k2(cid:105)−(cid:104)k(cid:105)
(cid:104)k(cid:105)
These last two well-known expressions are useful in the
sensethattheyprovideareferencetowhichwecancom-
pare results obtained on a specific network in order to
understand its features. In particular, we can expect
very different behavior for spatial networks signalled by
different scaling of these quantities with N.
2. Planar Erdos-Renyi graph
FIG. 42 Top: Classical Apollonian packing. Bottom: Apol-
The first simple idea to generate a random planar
loniannetwork(showingthefirst,secondandthirdgeneration
graph would be to first generate a set of points in the
with circles, squares, dots symbols respectively). From [178].
two-dimensional space and then to construct an Erdos-
Renyi graph by connecting randomly the pairs of nodes.
It is clear that in this way we will generate mostly non-
B. Spatial generalization of the Erdos-Renyi graph
planar graphs but we could decide to keep links which
preserve planarity. We would then obtain something like
1. Erdos-Renyi graph
represented in Fig. 43 (top). It is easy to imagine even
TheErdos-Renyi(ER)graph[122–124]istheparadigm
for random graphs and is in many cases used as a null
model. One simple way to generate it is to run through
allpairsofnodesandtoconnectthemwithaprobability
p. The average number of links is then
N(N −1)
(cid:104)E(cid:105)=p (127)
2
givinganaveragedegreeequalto(cid:104)k(cid:105)=2(cid:104)E(cid:105)/N =p(N−
1). This last expression implies that in order to obtain
a sparse network, we have to choose a small p scaling as
p=(cid:104)k(cid:105)/N for large N.
The establishment of edges are random, independent
eventsandwethusobtainabinomialdistributionforthe
degree k of a node
(cid:18) (cid:19)
N −1
P(k)= pk(1−p)N−k+1 (128)
k
which can be approximated by a Poisson distribution
(cid:104)k(cid:105)k
P(k)≈e−(cid:104)k(cid:105) (129)
k!
FIG. 43 Top: Planar Erdos-Renyi network obtained by re-
for large N with pN = (cid:104)k(cid:105) constant. Other classical jecting links if they destroy planarity (N = 1000). Bottom:
results can be easily derived such as the clustering coef- Planar Barabasi-Albert network obtained by the same rejec-
ficient which can be shown to be C =p and the average tion method.
shortest path (cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105) (cid:39) logN/log(cid:104)k(cid:105). In fact for any gen-
eralized uncorrelated random graph characterized by a other extensions of this process and we could construct
40
a planar BA network by adding in the two-dimensional pair of nodes (i,j) is then given by p =f(η ,η ) where
ij i j
space nodes (with a random, uniformly distributed lo- f is a given function. In the case f = const. we recover
cation) which will connect according to the preferential the ER random graph. The average degree of a node
attachment. Wewouldthenkeepthenodeifitpreserves with fitness η is given by
the planarity of the system. We note here that there are
(cid:90) ∞
some visual similarities with networks obtained by ran- k(η)=N f(η,η(cid:48))ρ(η(cid:48))dη(cid:48) ≡NF(η) (134)
dom sequential adsorption of line segments [336] and it
0
would be interesting to understand if there are deeper
and the degree distribution is then
connections between these problems.
Instead, mathematicians studied closely related net- (cid:90)
works. IfwedenotebyP theclassofallsimplelabelled P(k)= ρ(η)δ(k−k(η))
N
planar graphs on N vertices 7. We can draw a random (135)
(cid:20) (cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:21) (cid:18) (cid:19)
planargraphR N fromthisclasswithauniformprobabil- =ρ F−1 k d F−1 k
ity[108]andaskforsomequestions[137,227]suchasthe N dk N
numberofverticesofagivendegree, thenumberoffaces
of a given size, etc. For instance, the following results A surprising result appears if we chose for example an
have been demonstrated ([108, 137, 227] and references exponential fitness distribution (ρ(η)∼e−η) and for the
therein) function f a threshold function of the form
• The random planar graph R N is connected with f(η i,η j)=θ[η i+η j −z(N)] (136)
probability at least 1/e.
where θ is the Heaviside function and z(N) a threshold
• The number N of unlabelled planar graphs scales which depends in general on N. In this case, Caldarelli
u
as et al. [71] found a power law of the form P(k) ∼ k−2
showing that a scale-free network can emerge even for
N u ∼γ uN (132) a peaked distribution of fitnesses. A spatial variant of
thismodelwasproposedin[225](anddiscussedtogether
with 9.48 < γ < 32.2 and the number N of la-
u l with other models in [154]) where the nodes i and j are
belled planar graphs as
connected if the following condition is met
N ∼γ (N!)1/N (133)
l (cid:96) (η +η )h[d (i,j)]≥φ (137)
i j E
where 27.22685<γ <27.22688.
(cid:96) where h[r] is a decreasing function and φ a constant
• The average number of edges of R is (cid:104)E(cid:105)≥ 13N. threshold. For this model, large fitnesses can therefore
N 7 compensateforlargerdistancesandwewillobservelarge-
• The degree distribution decreases at least as fitnesses nodes connected by long links. If the distribu-
N/γk(k+2)!. tion of fitnesses f(η) has a finite support or is strongly
(cid:96)
peaked around some value, we will have a typical scale
Otherpropertiescanbederivedforthisclassofnetworks r = h−1(φ/2η) above which no (or a very few) con-
0
and we refer the interested reader to [108, 137, 227] and nections are possible. As a result, the average shortest
references therein for more results. path will behave as for a lattice with (cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105) ∼ N1/d in a
d-dimensional space. For an exponential fitness distribu-
tion f(η) = e−λη and h(r) = r−β, the authors of [225]
3. The hidden variable model for spatial networks find various degree distributions according to the value
of β and goes to a power-law p(k) ∼ k−2 for β → 0
In the Erdos-Renyi model, the probability p to con-
and to an exponential distribution for β = d. Various
nect two nodes is a constant. In certain situations, we
other cases were also studied in [71, 225] and help to un-
could imagine that a node is described by a number of
derstand within this model when scale-free distribution
attributes (called hidden variables or fitnesses) and the
could appear.
connection between two nodes could depend on the re-
Finally,wementionhereageneralizationtoothermet-
spective attributes of these nodes [55, 71]. In order to
rics than the spatial distance [56, 319]. In particular, in
giveaconcreteexample,weassumethatthereisonlyone
[56], the probability that two individuals are connected
attribute η which is a real number distributed according
decreases with a particular distance between these in-
to a function ρ(η). The probability of connection for a
dividuals. This distance is computed in a ‘social’ space
andmeasuresthesimilarityfordifferentsocialattributes.
This model is able to reproduce some of the important
features measured in social network such as a large clus-
7 A labeled graph refers to a graph where distinct labels are as-
tering, positive degree correlations and the existence of
signed to all vertices. The labeling thus adds configurations in
thecountingprocessofthesegraphs. dense communities. More recently, Serrano et al. [284]
41
developed the idea of hidden metric space by using the Networksgeneratedwiththisalgorithmhavealargeclus-
one-dimensional circle as an underlying metric space in tering coefficient (as expected) and probably a large di-
whichnodesareuniformlydistributed. Adegreekdrawn ameter (although there is no quantitative prediction in
from a law P(k) ∼ k−γ for each node and each pair of [181]).
nodes is connected with a probability r(d;k,k(cid:48)) that de-
pends on the distance d between the nodes and also on
their respective degrees k and k(cid:48). In particular, they C. Spatial small worlds
studied the following form
1. The Watts-Strogatz model
(cid:18)
d
(cid:19)−α
r(d;k,k(cid:48))= 1+ (138) Already in 1977 spatial aspects of the small-world
d (k,k(cid:48))
c
problem were considered by geographers in the paper
where α>1 and where d ∼kk(cid:48) for example. The prob- [293] but we had to wait until 1998 when Watts and
c
ability that a pair of nodes is connected decreases then Strogatz (WS) proposed a simple and powerful network
with distance (as d−α) and increases with the product model[313]whichincorporatesbothaspatialcomponent
of their degrees kk(cid:48). In this case a long distance can be and long-range links. This model is obtained by starting
compensated by large degrees, as it is observed in var- fromaregularlatticeandbyrewiringatrandomthelinks
ious real-world networks. In this model, in agreement with a probability p (Fig. 44).
withothermodelsofspatialnetworks,weobservealarge
clustering (for α large enough).
4. The Waxman model
The Waxman model [314] is a random network topol-
ogy generator introduced by Waxman and appears as
a spatial variant of the ER model. In this model, the FIG.44 ConstructionoftheWatts-StrogatzmodelforN =8
nodes are uniformly distributed in the plane and edges nodes. At p = 0 each node is connected to its four nearest
areaddedwithprobabilitiesthatdependonthedistance neighbors and by increasing p an increasing number of edges
between the nodes is rewired. Adapted from Watts and Strogatz [313].
P(i,j)=βe−dE(i,j)/d0 (139) The degree distribution of this network has essentially
thesamefeaturesastheERrandomgraph,buttheclus-
Thequantityd 0determinesthetypicallengthofthelinks tering coefficient and the average shortest path depend
and β controls the total density of links. In terms of crucially on the amount of randomness p. The average
hiddenvariablestheattributeisherethespatiallocation clustering coefficient has been shown to behave as [28]
of the node and the pair connection probability depends
on the distance between the nodes. For d →∞, length 3(m−1)
0 (cid:104)C(p)(cid:105)(cid:39) (1−p)3 (141)
is i √rrelevant and we recover the ER model while for d 0 ∼ 2(2m−1)
1/ ρ (where ρ is the average density of nodes in the
plane) long links are prohibited and we are in the limit wheretheaveragedegreeis(cid:104)k(cid:105)=2m. Theaverageshort-
of a lattice-like graph. est path has been shown to scale as [36, 37]
Even if this model is very simple, it served as a first
(cid:18) (cid:19)
step towards the elaboration of more sophisticated mod- (cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105)∼N∗F N (142)
els of the Internet [332]. Also, despite its simplicity, this N∗
Waxman model can be used in order to understand the
importanceofspaceindifferentprocessestakingplaceon where the scaling function behaves as
thisnetwork. Wecanciteforexamplenavigationorcon-
(cid:40)
gestion problems in communication systems (see section x for x(cid:28)1
F(x)∼ (143)
V.D). lnx for x(cid:29)1
A growth model close to the Waxman model was pro-
posed in [181] where at each time step a new node u is The crossover size scales as N∗ ∼ 1/p [28, 36, 37] which
added in the plane and is connected to existing nodes basically means that the crossover from a large-world to
v with a probability (if it fails to connect the node is a small-world occurs for an average number of shortcuts
discarded) equal to one
P(u,v)=βe−αdE(u,v) (140) N∗p∼1 (144)
or even decreasing as power law P(u,v) ∼ d (u,v)−τ. The network can thus be seen as clusters of typical size
E
42
N∗(p) connected by shortcuts. shortcuts p∗N =p∗(L)Ld then satisfies
Theinterestofthesenetworksisthattheycansimulta-
neously present some features typical of random graphs P c(L)p∗(L)Ld ∼1 (147)
(with a small-world behavior (cid:96)∼logN) and of clustered
which means that if we have a fraction p > p∗ of long
lattices with a large average clustering coefficient (while
shortcuts, the system will behave as a small-world. We
for ER random graph (cid:104)C(cid:105)∼1/N).
then obtain
(cid:40)
L−d if α<1
2. Spatial generalizations p∗(L)∼ (148)
Lα−d−1 if α>1
One of the first variants of the Watt-Strogatz model
was proposed in [173, 195, 280] and was subsequently and a logarithmic behavior logL/Ld for α = 1. For a
generalized to higher dimensions d [282]. In this variant given value of p we thus have one length scale
(cid:40)
p−1/d if α<1
L∗(p)∼ (149)
p1/(α−d−1) if α>1
whichinthespecialcaseα=0wasobtainedin[247]. We
will then have the following scaling form for the average
shortest path
(cid:18) (cid:19)
L
(cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105)=L∗F (150)
α L∗
where the scaling function varies as
(cid:40)
x if x(cid:28)1
F (x)∼ (151)
α
lnx if x(cid:29)1
FIG. 45 Schematic representation of spatial small-world
in (a) one dimension and (b) two dimensions. The dashed
linesrepresentthelong-rangelinksoccuringwithprobability (or even a function of the form (lnx)σ(α) with σ(α) > 0
q((cid:96))∼(cid:96)−α. From [282]. for x (cid:29) 1). The characteristic length for α > 1 thus
scales as
(seeFig.45),thenodesarelocatedonaregularlatticein
L∗(p)∼p1/(α−d−1) (152)
d-dimensionswithperiodicboundaries. Themainideais
that if the shortcuts have to be physically realized there
anddisplaysathresholdvalueα =d+1avaluealready
is a cost associated with their length. A way to model c
obtained with the average clustering coefficient for d=1
this is to add links with a probability
in [282]. For α>α , the length scale L∗(p) is essentially
c
q((cid:96))∼(cid:96)−α (145) finite and less than 1, which means that for all values of
Lthesystemhasalarge-worldbehaviorwith(cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105)∼L. In
For each node, we add a shortcut with probability p otherwords,thelinksinthiscasecannotbelongenough
whichimpliesthatonaveragetherewillbepN additional andthegraphcanalwaysbecoarse-grainedtoreproduce
shortcuts. a regular lattice. In the opposite case α<α c, the length
Concerning the average shortest path, it is clear that
L∗(p)divergesforp→0andtherewillalwaysbearegime
if α is large enough, the shortcuts will be small and the such that L∗(p)(cid:29)L implying a small-world logarithmic
behavior of (cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105) will be ‘spatial’ with (cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105) ∼ N1/d. On behavior.
the other hand, if α is small enough we can expect a Finally, we mention a recent numerical study [197] of
small-world behavior (cid:96) ∼ logN. In fact, various studies this model which seems to show that for α>d there are
[173, 239, 282] discussed the existence of a threshold α c two regimes. First, for d<α<2d
separating the two regimes, small- and large-world. We
follow here the discussion of [259] who studied carefully (cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105)∼(logN)σ(α) (153)
the behavior of the average shortest path. The probabil-
ity that a shortcut is ‘long’ is given by with
(cid:40)
(cid:90) L/2 1/α for d=1
P (L)= q((cid:96))d(cid:96) (146) σ = 2−α (154)
c 4/α for d=2
(1−c)L/2 4−α
where c is small but non-zero. The critical fraction of Thesecondregimeisobtainedforα>2dwherethe‘spa-
43
tial’ regime (cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105) ∼ N1/d is recovered. We note that nu- erentially connect to hubs, unless the hub is too far in
merically,thescalingpredictionof[259]withtworegimes which case it could be better to connect to a less con-
only and the result of [197] are however difficult to dis- nected node but closer in space. In order to have long
tinguish. For d=1 there are no discrepancies (σ =1 for links,thetargetnodemusthavealargedegreeinorderto
α=d=1)andford=2,theresultsforα=2andα=4 compensate for a small F(d) such that kF(d) ∼ 1. This
are consistent with the analysis of [259]. A problem thus is for instance the case for airlines: Short connections go
subsists here for d = 2 and α = 3 for which σ = 4/3, a to small airports while long connections point preferably
value probably difficult to distinguish numerically from to big airports, ie. well-connected nodes.
corrections obtained at α=α =d+1.
c
D. Spatial growth models 2. Preferential attachment and distance selection
1. Generalities
Several models including distance were proposed [33,
104,177,221,271,282,310,325,329]andwereviewhere
Inthispartwewillreviewmodelsofgrowingnetworks
the main results obtained in these studies. The N nodes
which essentially elaborate on the preferential attach-
of the network are supposed to be in a d-dimensional
ment model proposed by Albert and Barabasi [8, 287].
space of linear size L and we assume that they are dis-
In the preferential attachment, there is a propensity to
tributed randomly in space with uniform density ρ. One
connect a new node to an already well-connected one
could use other distributions: For instance in cities the
[8,287]whichisprobablyanimportantingredientinthe
densitydecreasesexponentiallyfromthecenter[84]. The
formation of various real-world networks.
caseofrandomlydistributedpointsisinterestingsinceon
The process to generate such a Barabasi-Albert (BA)
average it preserves natural symmetries such as transla-
network is thus extremely simple. Starting from a small
tionalandrotationalinvarianceincontrast withlattices.
‘seed’ network, we introduce a new node n at each time
Essentially two different cases were considered in the
step. This new node is allowed to make m connections
literature.
towards nodes i with a probability
Π ∝k (155)
n→i i
where k is the degree of node i. We refer the interested a. Finite range case. In this case, the function F(d) de-
i
reader to the various books and reviews which describe creasessharplywithdistance,typicallyasanexponential
indetailthismodel[7,70,87,113,244,255]. Inparticu- [33]
lar, the degree distribution behaves as a power-law with
exponent P(k) ∼ k−γ with γ = 3, the average shortest F(d)=e−d/rc (158)
path behaves at the dominant order as logN, and the
average clustering coefficient is given by and thus introduces a new scale in the system, the in-
teraction range r . When the interaction range is of the
c
m
(cid:104)C(cid:105)= (lnN)2 (156) order of the system size (or larger), the distance is ir-
8N relevant and the obtained network will be scale-free. In
contrast,whentheinteractionrangeissmallcomparedto
while C(k)∼1/k.
thesystemsize,weexpectnewpropertiesandacrossover
Inmanynetworkssuchastransportationorcommuni-
between these two regimes.
cationnetworks,distanceishoweverarelevantparameter
and real-world examples suggest that when long-range The important dimensionless parameters are here the
links are existing, they usually connect to hubs-the well- average number n of points in a sphere of radius r c
connected nodes. Many variants of the BA model were
πd/2
proposed and a few of them were concerned with space. n=ρrd (159)
ThegrowthprocessisthesameasforBA,butinaddition cΓ(1+ d)
2
one has to specify the location of the new node. In most
models, the location is taken at random and uniformly and the ratio which controls the importance of spatial
distributed in space. The attachment probability is then effects
written as r
η = c (160)
L
Π ∝k F[d (n,i)] (157)
n→i i E
(where L is the system size). It can then be shown [33]
where F is a function of the euclidean distance d E(n,i) thatthedegreedistributionfollowsthescalingformvalid
from the node n to the node i. only for η (cid:28)1
WhenF isadecreasingfunctionofdistance(asinmost
cases), this form (Eq. 157) implies that new links pref- P(k)∼k−γf(k/k ) (161)
c
44
with γ =3 and where the cut-off k behaves as
c
k ∼nβ (162)
c
whereβ (cid:39)0.13. Thedistanceeffectthuslimitsthechoice
of available connections and thereby limits the degree
distribution for large values.
Also, when the distance effect is important we expect
a large value of the average clustering coefficient. In the
limit of small η, we can expect the result of random ge-
ometric graphs (see section IV.A.1 and [104]) to hold
√
C ≡(cid:104)C(cid:105)(η =0)=1−3 3/4π (cid:39)0.59 (163)
0
(ford=2). Weexpecttorecoverthislimitforη →0and
foranaverageconnectivity(cid:104)k(cid:105)=6whichisawell-known
result in random geometry. If η is not too small, the
preferential attachment is important and induces some
dependenceoftheclusteringcoefficientonn. Inaddition,
weexpectthat(cid:104)C(cid:105)(η)willbelowerthan(cid:104)C(cid:105)(0)sincethe
longer links will not connect to the nearest neighbors.
Numerical results show that there is a good collapse (see
Fig. 46a) when (cid:104)C(cid:105)(η) is expressed in terms of n and is
a decreasing function since when n increases the number
ofneighborsofthenodewillincreasethusdecreasingthe
probability that two of them will be linked.
The average shortest path is described by a scaling
ansatz which governs the crossover from a spatial to a
scale-free network
(cid:20) (cid:21) FIG. 46 (a) Clustering coefficient versus the mean number
N
(cid:104)(cid:96)(N,η)(cid:105)=[N∗(η)]αΦ (164) n = ρπr2 of points in the disk of radius r (plotted in Log-
α N∗(η) c c
Lin). ThedashedlinecorrespondstothetheoreticalvalueC
0
computed when a vertex connects to its adjacent neighbors
with
without preferential attachment. (b) Data collapse for the
(cid:40) average shortest path obtained. The first part can be fitted
xα for x(cid:28)1
byapower-lawwithexponent≈0.3followedbyalogarithmic
Φ (x)∼ (165)
α lnx for x(cid:29)1 regime for N >N∗. Both figures from [33].
The typical size N∗ depends on η and we can find its
behavior in two extreme cases. For η (cid:29)1, space is irrel- the network is much larger: To go from a point A to
evant and a point B, we essentially have to pass through most of
the points in between and the behavior of this network
N∗(η (cid:29)1)∼N 0 (166) is much that of a lattice with (cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105) ∼ Nα, although the
diameterishere smallerprobablyduetothe existenceof
where N is a finite constant. When η (cid:28) 1, the exis-
0 some rare longer links (in the case of a lattice we expect
tence of long-range links will determine the behavior of
α=1/d). Probably larger networks and better statistics
(cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105). If we denote by a = 1/ρ1/d the typical inter-node
are needed here.
distance,thetransitionfromalargetoasmall-worldwill
be observed for r ∼a(N∗) which leads to This model was extended [31] in the case of weighted
c
growing networks in a two-dimensional geometrical
1 space. The model considered consists of growth and the
N∗(η (cid:28)1)∼ (167)
ηd probability that a new site connects to a node i is given
by
InFig.46b,theansatzEq.(164)togetherwiththeresults
Eqs.(166),(167)isshown. Thisdatacollapseisobtained swe−dni/rc
Π = i , (168)
for α (cid:39)0.3 and N
0
(cid:39)180 (for d=2). For N >N∗, the n→i (cid:80) jsw
j
e−dnj/rc
network is a small-world: the diameter is growing with
thenumberofpointsas(cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105)∼logN. Intheoppositecase where r is a typical scale and d is the Euclidean dis-
c ni
of the spatial network with a small interaction range, tance between n and i. This rule of strength driven
45
FIG. 47 Distance strength versus k for two different cases FIG.48 AverageEuclideandistancebetweenthebarycenter
(η=0.02andη=10.0). Whenη isnotsmall,spaceisirrele- G of all nodes and the 10 most central nodes (C) versus the
vant and there are no correlations between degree and space parameter η (Here δ = 0, N = 5,000 and the results are
as signalled by β ≈ 1. When spatial effects are important averaged over 50 configurations). When space is important
d
(η = 0.02 (cid:28) 1), non-linear correlations appear and β > 1. (ie. smallη),thecentralnodesareclosertothegravitycenter.
d
We observe a crossover for k (cid:39) 10−20 to a power-law be- Forlargeη,spaceisirrelevantandtheaveragedistancetends
havior and the power-law fit over this range of values of k is tothevaluecorrespondingtoauniformdistribution(cid:104)r(cid:105) unif =
shown (full lines). From [31]. 2/3 (dotted line). From [31].
preferential attachment with spatial selection, general- the case η =∞, and is in fact directed towards these re-
izesthepreferentialattachmentmechanismdrivenbythe gional hubs. These medium-large degree vertices there-
strength to spatial networks. Here, new vertices connect fore carry a much larger traffic than they would do if
more likely to vertices which correspond to the best in- global hubs were available, leading to a faster increase of
terplay between Euclidean distance and strength. thetrafficasafunctionofthedegree,eventuallyresulting
inasuper-linearbehavior. Moreover, aspreviouslymen-
The weights are also updated according to the follow-
tioned, the increase in distance costs implies that long
ing rule already studied in another paper [30]
range connections can be established only towards the
w →w +δw ij. (169) hubsofthesystem: thiseffectnaturallyleadstoasuper-
ij ij sw linear accumulation of sd(k) at larger degree values.
i
The spatial constraints act at both local and global
for all neighbors j ∈Γ(i) of i. level of the network structure by introducing a distance
The model contains thus two relevant parameters: the cost in the establishment of connections. It is therefore
ratiobetweenthetypicalscaleandthesizeofthesystem importanttolookattheeffectofspaceinglobaltopolog-
η =r c/L, and the ability to redistribute weights, δ. ical quantities such as the betweenness centrality. Hubs
The most important results concerning the traffic are are natural crossroads for paths and it is natural to ob-
thefollowing. Thecorrelationsappearingbetweentraffic serve a correlation between g and k as expressed in the
andtopologyofthenetworkarelargelyaffectedbyspace generalrelationg(k)∼kµ wheretheexponentµdepends
as the value of the exponents β and β depend on η on the characteristics of the network and we expect this
w d
(for β see Fig. 47). Strikingly, the effect of the spatial relation to be altered when spatial constraints become
d
constraint is to increase both exponents β and β to important (see section II.B.2). In particular, the be-
w d
values larger than 1 and although the redistribution of tweenness centrality displays relative fluctuations which
theweightsislinear,non-linearrelationssw(k)andsd(k) increase as η decreases and become quite large. This
as a function of k appear. For the weight strength the canbeunderstoodbynoticingthattheprobabilitytoes-
effect is not very pronounced with an exponent of order tablishfar-reachingshort-cutsdecreasesexponentiallyin
β ≈ 1.1 for η = 0.01, while for the distance strength Eq. (168) and only the large traffic of hubs can compen-
w
the non-linearity has an exponent of order β ≈1.27 for sate this decay. Far-away geographical regions can thus
d
η =0.02. onlybelinkedbyedgesconnectedtolargedegreevertices,
The nonlinearity induced by the spatial structure can whichimpliesamorecentralroleforthesehubs. Theex-
be explained by the following mechanism affecting the istence of fluctuations means that nodes with small de-
network growth. The increase of spatial constraints af- gree may have a relatively large betweenness centrality
fects the trend to form global hubs, since long distance (or the opposite), as observed in the air-transportation
connectionsarelessprobable,anddrivesthetopologyto- network (see Fig. 10 and [146]). The present model de-
wards the existence of ‘regional’ hubs of smaller degree. finesanintermediatesituationinthatwehavearandom
The total traffic however is not changed with respect to network with space constraints that introduces a local
46
structure since short distance connections are favored.
Shortcuts and long distance hops are present along with
a spatial local structure that clusters spatially neighbor-
ing vertices. In Fig. 48 we plot the average distance
d(G,C) between the barycenter G and the 10 most cen-
tral nodes. As expected, as spatial constraints become
more important, the most central nodes get closer to the
spatial barycenter of the network.
b. Power law decay of F(d). In this case, the function F
in Eq. (157) is varying as
F(d)=dα (170)
This problem was considered in [221, 325, 329]. The nu-
merical study presented in [325] shows that in the two-
dimensional case, for all values of α the average shortest
path behaves as logN. The degree distribution is how-
ever different for α > −1 where it is broad, while for
α < −1, it is decreasing much faster (the numerical re-
sults in [325] suggest according to a stretched exponen-
tial).
In [221], Manna and Sen study the same model but
for various dimensions and for values of α going from
−∞ to +∞ where the node connects to the closest and
the farthest node, respectively (Fig. 49). These authors
indeedfindthatifα>α thenetworkisscale-freeandin
c
agreementwith[325]thatα (d=2)=−1whileforlarge
c
dimensions α decreases with d (the natural guess α =
c c
1−d is not fully supported by their simulations). This
study was complemented by another one by the same
authors[281]inthed=1caseandwheretheprobability
to connect to a node i is given by (which was already
proposed in [329]) FIG.49 VariousnetworksobtainedwiththeruleF(d)=dα.
From [221].
Π ∼kβd (n,i)α (171)
n→i i E
Forα>α =−0.5thenetworkisscale-freeatβ =1with
c such that the quantity
an exponent γ = 3. They also find a scale-free network
for a line in the α − β plane and also for β > 1 and
E =λd (i,j)+h (173)
α < −0.5. The degree-dependent clustering coefficient E j
C(k) behaves as
is minimum. The quantity h is a measure of central-
j
ity which can be either the average shortest path length
C(k)∼k−b (172)
fromj,ortheshortestpathlengthtoarootnode,etc. A
new node would then typically like to connect to a very
where the authors found numerically that b varies from
central node but is limited by the cost measured by the
0 to 1 (which is the value obtained in the BA case).
distance. There will thus be an interplay between these
twoconstraintsandwecanexplorethetwoextremes: for
small λ, we obtain a star network. In the opposite case,
3. Growth and local optimization whenλislarge,onlydistanceisimportantandweobtain
some sort of dynamical version of the Euclidean mini-
a. A model for the Internet. In the Internet, the degree mum spanning tree. If √λ has some intermediate values
distribution is a power law (see for example [255] and (λ growing slower than N and is larger than a certain
referencestherein)andinordertoexplainthisfact,com- constant), wecanobtainanetworkwithapowerlawde-
puter scientists [126] proposed a tree growth model with gree distribution whose exponent γ depends on λ. For
local optimization. More precisely, at each unit time, a instance if λ ∼ N1/3 then γ = 1/6 (see [126] for other
new node i is connected to an already connected node j results on this model).
47
Even if the resulting network is not obtained by min- (see Fig. 50). In this figure, we see that the route factor
imizing some global function, the addition of new nodes
minimizes a cost function and in this sense we can speak
of a local minimization.
b. Amodelfordistributionnetworks. Many networks, in-
cludingtransportationanddistributionnetworksevolved
intimeandincreasedtheirservicearea. Clearly,inthese
situationstheresultingnetworksaregrowingandcannot
result from a global optimization but instead, local opti-
mizationcouldbeareasonablemechanismforexplaining
the organization of these structures.
Intheexampleofatransportationnetworksuchasthe
train system, the nodes represent the train stations and
the edges the rail segments between adjacent stations.
Inmanyofthesesystems, thereisalsoa root node which
acts as a source of the distribution system or in the case
oftherailwaycanbeconsideredtobethecentralstation.
During the evolution of the network at least two factors
couldbeconsidered. First,thetotallengthofthesystem
FIG. 50 Route factor q and average edge length l versus α
whichrepresentsthecostoftheinfrastructureshouldnot inEq.(175). TheseresultsareobtainedforN =104 vertices
be too large. Space has another important role here: and in the inset the network is obtained for α = 12. From
the transportation system should also allow to connect [135].
two nodes in the network through a shortest path whose
lengthisnottoofarfromthe‘ascrowflies’distance. This
qdecreasessharplywhenαincreasesfromzero,whilethe
efficiencyisforexamplemeasuredbytheroutefactor-or
average edge length -which is a measure of the building
detour index - (see section II.B.2.c) which for two nodes
cost of the network- increases slowly. This suggests that
i and j of the network reads
itispossibletogrownetworkswithasmallcostbutwith
a good efficiency.
d (i,j)
Q(i,j)= R
Gastner and Newman [135] also studied a simpler ver-
d (i,j)
E
sion of this model where the local minimization acts on
For a system with a root node 0, one can then compute the quantity
the route factor as the average over all nodes except 0
E(cid:48) =d (i,j)+βd (j,0) (176)
ij E R
q =
1 (cid:88)d R(i,0)
(174)
which is similar to the model for the Internet proposed
N d (i,0)
E
i(cid:54)=0 byFabrikant,Koutsoupias,Papadimitriou[126](seealso
sectionIV.D.3.a)butwheretheverticesareaddedoneby
Following these two requirements, Gastner and New-
one. Thismodelproducesnetworkssimilartotheoneob-
man [135] proposed a model of a growing network where
tainedwithEq.(175)andself-organizestonetworkswith
vertices are initially randomly distributed in the two-
smallqwhichisnotimposedhere. Thismodelcanbeap-
dimensional plane and where one vertex is designated
pliedtothesetofstationsoftheBostonrailnetworkand
as the root node 0. A network is then grown from its
producesanetworkingoodcorrespondencewiththereal
root by adding an edge between an unconnected node i
one. Also, the small value of q is confirmed in different
to a vertex j which belongs to the network. The edge
empirical examples such as sewer systems, gas pipelines,
is chosen according to a local minimization process such
and the Boston subway [135] where the ratio l/l is
that the quantity MST
intherange[1.12,1.63]whiletheroutefactorislessthan
1.6 (and compared to the MST is improved by a factor
d (i,j)+d (j,0)
E ij =d E(i,j)+α E d (i,0R ) (175) in the range [1.4,1.8]).
E
Thenetworksobtainedherearetreeswhichisasimpli-
is minimum and where α > 0 is here a parameter con- fication for many of the real-world networks which usu-
trolling the importance of the route factor. For α = 0, ally contain loops. In addition, there is also usually an
the algorithm adds always a link to the closest vertex interaction between the density of points and the net-
and the resulting network is similar to the MST and has workandthisco-evolutionisnottakenintoaccounthere.
a poor route factor [135]. When α increases the route However,thissimplemodeloflocaloptimizationseemsto
factor decreases and the average edge length l (not be capture important ingredients and could probably serve
confused with the average shortest path (cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105)) increases as a good starting point for further improvements.
48
the example of Fig. 51 the road from M will develop a
bended shape until it reaches the line AB and intersects
it perpendicularly as it is commonly observed in most
urban settings. At the intersection point, a singularity
occurs with (cid:126)u +(cid:126)u ≈0 and one is then forced to grow
A B
twoindependentroadsfromtheintersectiontoAandB.
Interestingly, we note that although the minimum ex-
penditure principle was not used, the rule Eq. (178) was
FIG. 51 M is the closest network’s point to both centers A also proposed by Runions et al. [273] in a study about
and B. The road will grow to point M’ in order to maxi- leaf venation patterns.
mallyreducethecumulativedistance∆ofAandBfromthe The growth scheme described so far leads to tree-like
network. From [39]. structures which are on one side economical, but which
are hardly efficient. For example the path length along
a minimum spanning tree scales as a power 5/4 of the
c. Amodelforstreetandroadnetworks. Inthecaseofur- Euclidean distance between the end-points [97, 116] and
banstreetpatterns,strikingstatisticalregularitiesacross better accessibility is granted if loops are present. The
differentcitieshavebeenrecentlyempiricallyfound,sug- authorsof[39,40]followed[273]andassumedthatanew
gestingthatageneralanddetail-independentmechanism node can trigger the construction of more than one por-
may be in action (see section III.B.1). The rationale to tion of road per time step, leading to the existence of
invokealocaloptimalityprincipleinthiscontextisasin loops. This model produces realistic results (some ex-
the case of distribution networks based on costs: every
newroadisbuilttoconnectanewlocationtotheexisting
road network in the most efficient way [47]. The locality
oftheruleisimplementedbothintimeandspaceduring
the evolution and formation of the street network, in or-
der to reflect evolution histories that greatly exceed the
time-horizon of planners. The self-organized pattern of
streets emerges as a consequence of the interplay of the
geometrical disorder and the local rules of optimality.
Thislocaloptimizationprocessproposedin[39]canbe
understood with the simple following example (Fig. 51).
We assume that at a given stage of the evolution, two
nodesAandB stillneedtobeconnectedtothenetwork.
At any time step, each new node can trigger the con-
struction of a single new portion of road of fixed (small)
FIG. 52 Snapshots of the network at different times of its
length. In order to maximally reduce their distance to evolution: for (a) t = 100, (b) t = 500, (c) t = 2000, (d)
thenetwork,bothAandBwouldselecttheclosestpoints t = 4000 (the growth rate is here η = 0.1). At short times,
M and M in the network as initial points of the new we have almost a tree structure and loops appear for larger
1 2
portions of roads to be built. If M and M are distinct, density values obtained at larger times (the number of loops
1 2
segmentsofroadsareaddedalongthestraightlinesM A then increases linearly with time). From [39].
1
and M B. If M =M =M, it is not economically rea-
2 1 2
sonable to build two different segments of roads and in amples are shown in Fig. 52), which are in good agree-
thiscaseonlyonesingleportionMM(cid:48) ofroadisallowed. ment with empirical data which demonstrates that even
The main assumption here is that the best choice is to in the absence of a well defined blueprint, non-trivial
build it in order to maximize the reduction of the cumu- global properties emerge. This agreement confirms that
lative distance ∆ from M to A and B the simple local optimization is a good candidate for the
mainprocessdrivingtheevolutionofcitystreetpatterns
∆=[d(M,A)+d(M,B)]−[d(M(cid:48),A)+d(M(cid:48),B)] (177) but it also shows that the spatial distribution of nodes
ρ(r) is crucial. Concerning this last aspect, a more gen-
The maximization of ∆ is done under the constraint eralmodeldescribingtheco-evolutionofthenodedistri-
|MM(cid:48)|=const.(cid:28)1 and a simple calculation leads to bution ρ(r) and the network was proposed in [40].
Another interesting model was proposed recently by
−−−→
MM(cid:48) ∝(cid:126)u +(cid:126)u (178) Courtat, Gloaguen and Douady [100]. In this model,
A B
each new ‘settlement’ is added every time step at a cer-
where (cid:126)u and (cid:126)u are the unit vectors from M in the di- tain location and connects to the existing infrastructure
A B
rectionofAandBrespectively. Therule(178)caneasily network in a way similar to [39]. The city generates a
beextendedtothesituationwheremorethantwocenters spatialfielddescribingthe‘attractiveness’ofeverypoint.
want to connect to the same point M. Already in this Thispotentialfieldhasahardrepulsiontermatshortdis-
simplesettingnon-trivialgeometricalfeaturesappear. In tances and a large distance behavior proportional to the
49
total ‘mass’ of the city (measured by the total length of E. Optimal networks
its roads) and decreasing as a power law with distance.
The sum of all influences of all roads then produce local Although one of the main pillars in complex systems
minima and each new node has its own policy. Among studies is the emergence of a collective behavior without
others, the parameter ω is related to the ‘wealth’ of the any central planning, it is usually a matter of time scale
node and controls the number of roads constructed to compared with the typical time horizon of planners. On
connect a new settlements: if ω = 1 all possible roads a short time scale it is reasonable to assume that plan-
are constructed and in the opposite case ω =0, only the ningplaysaroleandthatthesystemunderconsideration
shortest road is built. Another important parameter in evolves by using an optimization process. On a larger
this model is the probability to be at the optimal loca- time scale, most systems result from the addition of suc-
tion controlled by the potential. For small P e the city is cessivelayersandevenifeachoftheselayersistheresult
‘unorganized’ and nodes are added randomly, while for of an optimization process, it is very likely that the long
largeP e theprobabilitytosticktotheoptimallocationis time result is not an optimum.
large. In Fig. 53, we show the We show in Fig. 53 differ-
Optimization is however of great importance in many
practical engineering problems and both the problem of
optimal networks [180] and of optimal traffic on a net-
work [4, 309] have a long tradition in mathematics and
physics. It is well known, for example that the laws that
describe the flow of currents in a resistor network [193]
can be derived by minimizing the energy dissipated by
the network [115]. On the other hand, optimal networks
have been shown to be relevant in the study of mam-
malianscirculatorysystem[228],foodwebs[132],general
transportation networks [26], metabolic rates [317], river
networks [223], and gas pipelines or train tracks [134].
Allthesestudiessharethefactthatthenodesofthenet-
work are embedded in a d-dimensional euclidean space
which implies that the degree is almost always limited
and the connections restricted to ‘neighbors’ only.
A second broad class of optimal networks where spa-
tial constraints are absent has been also recently investi-
gated. Ithasbeenshown,forexample,thatoptimization
of both the average shortest path and the total length
can lead to small-world networks [226], and more gener-
ally, degree correlations [48] or scale-free features [302]
can emerge from an optimization process. Cancho and
FIG. 53 Simulations of the model proposed by Courtat,
Sole [169] showed that the minimization of the average
Gloaguen,Douady[100]. Thedifferentnetworksareobtained
shortest path and the link density leads to a variety of
forvariousvaluesoftheparametersP andω. Atsmallvalues
e
of P , the city is organized while for large P , the nodes are networksincludingexponential-likegraphsandscale-free
e e
added at random. For small ω, a minimum number of roads networks. Guimera et al. [148] studied networks with
are constructed to connect new nodes while in the opposite minimal search cost and found two classes of networks:
cases all possible connections are added. From [100]. star-like and homogeneous networks. Finally, Colizza et
al. [90] studied networks with the shortest route and the
ent networks obtained by varying the two parameters P smallest congestion and showed that this interplay could
e
and ω. The variety of networks obtained by varying two lead to a variety of networks when the number of links
parametersonlyisremarkable-goingfroma‘favella-like’ per node is changed.
organization(forlargeP )toahighlyorganizedarea(for Finally, we note that optimal networks could serve as
e
smallP )-andsuggeststhatthisapproachcouldprovide interesting null models. For example, the (Euclidean)
e
an interesting first step for the modelling of urban street minimum spanning tree (MST) is obtained by connect-
networks. ing all the nodes with a minimum total length and as an
Finally, we end this section by noting that there are illustration we show in Fig. 54 the MST obtained for the
many other models for roads and urban structures and set of stations present in the Paris subway in 2009. In
that we focused here on a physicist-like approach with thissubwaycasethetotallengthisdirectlyconnectedto
minimal models. In particular, there are many studies thecostofthenetworkandtheMSTrepresentsthemost
ontheseproblemsdonebygeographers(withusuallythe economical network. The MST has however some draw-
help of cellular automata) and we refer the interested backs such as a large average shortest path and a large
reader to articles in the handbook [44] for more refer- vulnerability to failure, and the real subway network has
ences. obviouslymanyredundantlinks. Itishoweverinteresting
50
FIG.55 Schematiccomparisonbetweenatransportationnet-
workwhichoptimizestheusertraveltimeanddistance(left)
and network which minimizes the construction costs (right).
system in the 1970s and after the airline deregulation in
1978 most of the airline carriers adopted it. This system
is based on the construction of regional hubs and to the
creationofmajorroutesbetweenthesehubs(seeFig.56).
One can easily compare the point-to-point (P2P) transit
FIG. 54 Top: Paris subway network (2009). Bottom: Cor-
responding Minimum spanning tree.
FIG. 56 Schematic comparison between a point-to-point
to understand the interplay between costs and efficiency
transit model which optimizes the user travel time and dis-
by comparing the actual network with the MST.
tance (left) and a hub-and-spoke system (with two hubs
As we can see optimal networks appear in many dif-
H and H ) which minimizes the total operating costs by
1 2
ferentbranchessuchasmathematics, physicsandalsoin
bundling together the traffic between the two hubs.
engineering. Thissubjectisinfactsobroadthatitwould
deserve a whole review to explore its various aspects. In
model and the one hub-and-spoke model for N nodes.
this chapter, we thus made the choice to restrict our-
In the hub-and-spoke model, there are of the order N
selves to the most recent and relevant statistical studies
routes to connect all nodes, while in the P2P the num-
involving optimal networks and space. ber of routes it is of the order N2. In transportation
systems such as airlines, this will lead to fuller planes,
larger benefits, and expensive operations such as sorting
1. Hub-and-spoke structure and accounting packages will be done at the hub only.
Obviously, there are also drawbacks. The centrality of
Animportantexampleoftheresultofanoptimization the hubs is very large and overloading at a hub can have
processisthehub-and-spokestructure. Inthisstructure, unexpectedconsequencesthroughoutthewholenetwork.
direct connections are replaced with fewer connections In other words, the hub is a bottleneck in the network
to hubs which form a network at a larger scale. The and in agreement with general results on networks, hubs
hub-and-spoke structure reduces the network costs, cen- also constitute the vulnerable points in the network, a
tralizes the handling and sorting, and allows carriers to failure at a hub being able to trigger large delays which
take advantage of scale economies through consolidation can propagate in the whole network.
of flows. Such networks have widespread application in Animportantproblemintransportationresearchisto
transportationandbecameinparticularpregnantinair- locate the hub(s) in a system of N nodes such that a
line transportation and has its cause mainly in the fact given cost function is minimum. Analytical research on
that a carrier has to minimize its costs even if by doing this hub location problem began relatively recently with
so the average traveling time for user is not minimized thestudy[252]andtheinterestedreadercanfindashort
(see the Fig. 55 for an illustration of this difference of review on this subject in [65]. In the following, we will
designs). detail one of the simplest case, known as the linearized
One of the first cases where the hub-and-spoke system multipleassignementmodelandwhichcanbeformulated
was observed is in the US with Delta Air Lines which asfollows. WeassumethatinasystemofN nodes,there
had its hub in Atlanta (GA). FedEx also adopted this is a known origin-destination matrix T (ie. the flow
ij
51
between i and j, see section III.C.1). We denote by C of the minimum average shortest path and of the effect
ij
the transportation cost per individual to go from i to j of congestion can be found in [19, 171]. The idea is then
and the importance of hubs is in the fact that there is
a discount factor 0 ≤ α ≤ 1 on the links among them.
For example in the airline case, bundling flows allows to
useforexamplelargeraircraftsandreducethepassenger-
mile costs. This discount factor implies that if k and m
are two hubs, then the interhub cost on k−m is given
byαC . IfwedenotebyX thefractionoftheflow
km ij,km
from i to j which is routed via the hubs k and m, the
function to be minimized is then
(cid:88)
E = T [C +αC +C ]X (179)
ij ik km mj ij,km
ijkm
under the constraints
(cid:88)
Z =p (180)
k
k
(cid:88)
X =1 (181)
ij,km
km
(cid:88)
X −Z ≤0 (182)
ij,km k
m
(cid:88)
X −Z ≤0 (183)
ij,km m
k
whereZ =1ifkisahubandzerootherwise. Welookfor
k
asolutionofthisproblemwithafixednumberpofhubs. FIG. 57 Examples of hub-and-spoke structures with rings.
The two last constraints ensure that the flow will not be (a-c,e): Typical fungi networks, in (c) a schematic represen-
routed via k and m unless both k and m are hubs. This tation of the nutrient flow is shown. (d) The model studied
type of minimization will lead to solutions schematically in [19, 112, 171] with spokes radiating from a hub. (f) Road
networkinHoustonshowinganinnerhubwithacomplicated
shown in Fig. 56 where the reduction of the number of
structure. From [171].
links is made possible by the establishment of hubs and
the bundling of flows between the hubs. For these op-
to study the competition between the centralized orga-
timal networks, the total network cost is minimum but
nization with paths going through a single central hub
obviouslyindividualtraveltimesarelarger(ascompared
and decentralized paths going along a ring and avoiding
with a point-to-point network).
the central hub in the presence of congestion. A simple
We just gave the flavor here of this type of approaches
model of hub-and-spoke structure together with a ring
and there is a huge amount of studies on this prob-
was proposed in [112]. In this model, N nodes are on a
lem that we cannot cite here because of lack of space.
circle and there is hub located at the center of the circle
Basically, there is a more practical research direction
(see Fig. 58). A radial link - a spoke - is present with
which amounts to add more characteristics of real-world
networks [65] such as transfer delays for example [253].
There is also a more mathematical point of view (see for
example[11])whereoptimalpropertiesarediscussed. At
thispointhowever,manyproblemsarestillunsolvedand
a statistical approach on the large network properties of
thishub-and-spokeminimizationproblemisprobablyan
interesting direction for future research.
2. Congestion and centralized organization FIG. 58 Models proposed in [112] and studied in [19, 171]
withcongestion. Acentralsiteisconnectedtoasiteonaring
In many real-world cases however the pure hub-and- withprobabilityp. In(a)allthelinksontheringaredirected
spokestructureisnotpresentandweobservearingstruc- and in (b) these links are not directed. From [112].
ture around a complicated core or an effective hub (see
for example Fig. 57). An interesting discussion on cen- probability p. When computing the shortest path, these
tralization versus decentralization from the perspectives spokesareassumedtocountfor1/2. Inotherwords, the
52
number of hops to go from one site on a ring to another where b = (cid:96)−c−1 and b = (N −1−(cid:96))((cid:96)−c). For
1 2
via the central hub (when it is possible) is then equal to paths of length (cid:96) ≤ c, there is no point to go through
1. In the case of directed links, the shortest path distri- the central hub. In the opposite case, when (cid:96) > c, we
bution is easy to compute and one finds [112] recover a distribution similar to the c = 0 case in [112].
The average shortest path is then
P((cid:96))= 1 (cid:2) 1+((cid:96)−1)p+(cid:96)(N −1−(cid:96)p2)p2(cid:3) (1−p)(cid:96)−1
N −1 (1−p)N−c[3+(N −2−c)p]
(cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105)=
(184)
p2(N −1)
In particular, we can check that the two limiting cases
p[2−2c+2N −(c−1)(c−N)p]−3 c(c−1)
are correct: for p→0, we obtain P((cid:96))→1/N−1 giving + +
p2(N −1) 2(N −1)
(cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105) = N/2 and for p → 1, P((cid:96)) → δ and (cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105) = 1. The
(cid:96),1
(190)
general expression for the average shortest path is
1 (cid:20) 2−p 3 2 (1−p)N 3 (cid:21) Inthecontinuouslimit(p→0,N →∞andz ≡(cid:96)/N and
(cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105)= N − + + (N −2+ ) ρ=pN fixed), the average shortest path is a function of
N −1 p p2 p p p
the various parameters (cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105) = (cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105)(ρ,c,N). In the case of
(185)
costsincreasinglinearlywithρ,theaverageshortestpath
In the undirected case, we have more paths going from
displays a minimum when ρ is varied (N and c being
one site to the other and the enumeration is a little bit
fixed). Indeed for ρ → 0, there are no spokes and (cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105)
more tedious. The result for the shortest path distribu-
scales as N. In the opposite case ρ large the cost is also
tion now reads [112]
large and it is less costly to go along the ring. In [19],
2 (cid:18) N −3 (cid:19) the authors used a simple approximation and found that
P((cid:96)=1)= 1+ p2 (with c≡kρ), the optimal value of ρ is
N −1 2
1 (186) (cid:114)
P((cid:96)≥2)= [a +a p+a p2+a p3 N
N −1 0 1 2 3 ρ∗ ≈ (191)
k
+a p4](1−p)2(cid:96)−4
4
a result that is confirmed numerically. This result can
where actually be rewritten as
a =2
0 pc(ρ)∼1 (192)
a =4((cid:96)−2)
1
whichmeansthattheoptimalsituationisobtainedwhen
a =2((cid:96)−1)(2N −4(cid:96)−3) (187)
2
the average cost of a radial trip through the central hub
a =−2(2(cid:96)−1)(N −2(cid:96)−1)
3 isoforderone: whencistoolarge, thistripistoocostly
a 4 =(cid:96)(N −2(cid:96)−1) and when p is too small, the existence of this path is too
unlikely. The same argument applied to nonlinear cost
For both these models a continuous limit can be defined c∼kρ2 gives the scaling
by taking the limit N → ∞ and p → 0 with ρ = pN
and z ≡ (cid:96)/N fixed. The shortest path distribution then ρ∗ ∼(N/k)1/3 (193)
converges to (in the undirected model)
For this optimal value, the minimum average shortest
NP((cid:96))→2[1+2ρz+2ρ2(1−2z)]e−2ρz (188) path is then of the order the cost
Theinterestingobservationmadein[19]isthatifwenow (cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105) ∼c(ρ∗) (194)
min
add a cost c each time a path goes through the central
hub, we could expect some sort of transition between a In the linear case c=kρ, one obtains
decentralizedregimewhereitislesscostlytostayonthe √
peripheral ring to a centralized regime where the cost is (cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105) ∼ kN (195)
min
notenoughtodivertthepathsfromthecentralhub. The
cost could in general depend on how busy the center is and in the nonlinear case c∼kρ2, one obtains
andcouldthereforegrowwiththenumberofconnections
(cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105) ∼(kN2)1/3 (196)
tothehub. Inthecaseofaconstantcostc,theexpression min
for the average shortest path is now [19]
These expressions and arguments apply essentially both
(cid:40) to the directed and non-directed model.
1 for (cid:96)≤c
P((cid:96))= N−1
1 [1+b p+b p2](1−p)(cid:96)−c−1 for (cid:96)>c Thisstudy[19]wasgeneralizedin[171]tothecaseofa
N−1 1 2 morecomplicatedcostfunctionsuchasc(ρ)=Cρ+Bρ2+
(189)
Aρ3 where the authors observe different behaviors and a
phasetransitionaccordingtothevaluesofthecoefficients
53
A, B, and C.
These studies show how congestion could have an im-
portant impact on the a priori optimal hub-and-spoke
structure and favor the transport along a ring. From a
more general perspective it would indeed be interesting
toobserveempiricallythistransitionfromapurelyradial
structure and the appearance of a ring for a congestion
large enough, as it is observed in many urban structures
for example.
3. From the MST to the SPT
There is a obviously a huge literature on optimal net-
FIG. 59 Different spanning trees obtained for different
works and we are obliged to restrict ourselves to a small
values of (µ,ν) in Eq. (197) obtained for the same set of
subset of subjects. We will discuss here the prototypes
N = 1000 nodes. (a) Minimum spanning tree obtained for
ofoptimalnetworksallowingustointroducesomeofthe
(µ,ν) = (0,1). In this case the total distance is minimized.
main objects such as the minimum spanning tree or the
(b) Optimal traffic tree obtained for (µ,ν) = (1/2,1/2). In
shortest path tree. Concerning the topic of connected thiscasewehaveaninterplaybetweencentralizationandmin-
networks over random points which minimize quantities imumdistanceresultinginlocalhubs. (c)Minimumeuclidean
such as the total route-length, the interested reader can distancetreeobtainedfor(µ,ν)=(1,1). Inthiscasecentral-
find a recent and modern account about mathematically ity dominates over distance and a ‘star’ structure emerges
tractable models in a series of papers by Aldous [10–12] with a few dominant hubs. (d) Optimal betweenneess cen-
and in the references therein. tralitytreeobtainedfor(µ,ν)=(1,0). Inthiscaseweobtain
theshortestpathtreewhichhasonestarhub(forthesakeof
Wewillnotintroducethedifferentnetworksonebyone
clarity, we omitted some links in this last figure). From [38].
butwewilladoptadifferentpointofviewbyintroducing
a generalized energy inspired by studies on optimal traf-
fic networks [38]. The problem is, given a set of N nodes √
which is larger by a non-trivial factor lnN than the
locatedina2-dimensionalplane,tofindthetreeconnect- √
typical internode distance which scales as 1/ N. Also,
ing them and which minimizes the following quantity
the total length (cid:96) (N) of the d-dimensional MST scales
T
(cid:88) as [292]
E = bµdν (197)
µν e e
(cid:90)
e∈T
(cid:96) T(N)∼N1−1/d ρ(x)d− d1 dx (200)
where d is the Euclidean length of a link (or it could be Rd
e
another measure of its cost) and b is the betweenness
e where ρ(x) denotes the point distribution in Rd. For a
centrality of the link (see section II.B.1.d). The expo-
uniformdistributionind=2,wethusobtainascalingof
nentsµandν controltherelativeimportanceofdistance √
the form (cid:96) (N) ∼ N. This scaling can be understood
againsttopologyasmeasuredbycentrality. Fig.59shows T
with the following simple argument. In the case of a
examples of spanning trees obtained for different values
uniformdensityρ,thetypicalinter-nodedistanceisgiven
of (µ,ν).
by 1/ρ1/d which scales as 1/N1/d and we have E ∝ N
Case (µ,ν)=(0,1). The energy is then links which reproduces the scaling (cid:96) (N)∼N ×N−1/d.
T
Wenoteherethataninterestingstudy[320]showsthat
(cid:88) theminimumspanningtreeforweightednetworkscanbe
E = d (198)
0,1 e partitionedintotwodistinctcomponents: the‘superhigh-
e∈T ways’ with large betweenness centrality nodes and the
‘roads’ with lower centrality. It would be interesting to
and represents the total length of the network. In real-
study the consequences of these results for the euclidean
world cases, the cost of the network is connected to
minimum spanning tree.
this quantity and it makes sense to try to minimize
There are many other studies on the MST and it is
it. Since the nodes are in space, the optimal resulting
impossibletoquotethemallhere. Wejustendthispara-
tree is called Euclidean MST. An example of the two-
graphbynotingthattheMSThasmanyinterestingcon-
dimensional MST is shown in the Fig. 59(a) and many
nections with other problems of statistical physics such
quantities can be calculated in the limit of a large num-
asinvasionpercolation,directedpolymersinrandomme-
ber of nodes. For example, for the 2d case, the length
dia, random resistor networks and spin glasses (see for
M(N) of the longest edge scales as [258]
example [110, 170, 264]).
(cid:114)
lnN Case (µ,ν) = (1/2,1/2). We obtain here the optimal
M(N)∼ (199)
N
54
FIG. 60 Betweenness centrality distribution for the MST
FIG. 61 Hierarchical organization emerging for the optimal
and for the OTT. The lines are power law fits and give for
traffic tree (µ,ν)=(1/2,1/2) (N =103 nodes). Longer links
the MST the theoretical result δ =4/3 and for the OTT the
lead to regional hubs which in turn connect to smaller hubs
value δ(cid:39)2.0 (N =104, 100 configurations). From [38].
distributing traffic in smaller regions. From [38].
traffictree(OTT)showninFig.59(b)andwhichdisplays (cid:80)
b d which is proportional to the average shortest
an interesting interplay between distance and shortest e e e
path with weights given by the euclidean distance. If
path minimization [38]. It has been shown that trees
we think of the betweenness centrality as a proxy for the
can be classified in ‘universality classes’ [222, 297] ac-
traffic, the energy also represents the total length trav-
cording to the size distribution of the two parts in which
eled on the system. An example of such a tree is shown
a tree can be divided by removing a link (or the sub-
in Fig. 59(c).
basins areas distribution in the language of river net-
work). We define A and A as the sizes of the two parts Case (µ,ν)=(1,0). In this case, the energy Eq. (197)
i j
in which a generic tree is divided by removing the link
is proportional to the average betweenness centrality
(i,j). The betweenness b of link (i,j) can be written
ij which is also the average shortest path (cid:80) b ∝ (cid:96). The
as b = 1[A (N −A )+A (N −A )], and the distri- e e
ij 2 i i j j tree(1,0)showninFig.59disthustheshortestpathtree
butions of A(cid:48)s and b(cid:48)s can be easily derived one from
(SPT)withanarbitrary‘star-like’hub(asmallnonzero
the other. It is therefore not surprising that the same
valueofν wouldselectasthestartheclosestnodetothe
exponent δ characterizes both P(A) ∼ A−δ and P(b).
gravity center). The total length here scales as
While we obtain the value δ = 4/3 for the MST [297],
for the OTT we obtain (Fig. 60) an exponent δ (cid:39) 2,
(cid:96) (N)∼N (201)
a value also obtained for trees grown with preferential T
attachment mechanism [7] (see also [265] for a support-
with a prefactor proportional to the linear size of the
ing argument). Interestingly, most real-world networks
system. Also, we note that if we were not restricted to
are also described by this value δ (cid:39) 2 [139]. The OTT
trees,thesolutionwouldofcoursebethecompletegraph
thus tends to have a more uniform centrality with re-
whichgivesanaverageshortestminimalandequaltoone.
spect to the MST [320], with important consequences on
The minimization of Eq. (197) thus provides a natural
the vulnerability of the network since there is no clearly
interpolation between the MST and the SPT, a prob-
designated ‘Achille’s heel’ for the OTT.
lem which was addressed in previous studies [190]. The
The traffic properties of the OTT are also interesting
degree distribution for all cases considered above (with
asthetrafficscalesasT ∼dτ withτ ≈1.5showingthat
ij ij the possible exception of (µ,ν) = (1,1) – a complete in-
largetrafficiscarriedoverlargedistanceandisthendis-
spection of the plane (µ,ν) is still lacking) is not broad,
patchedonsmallerhubsthatdistributeitonstillsmaller
possibly as a consequence of spatial constraints.
regions. Despite the limited range of degrees, we also
(cid:80)
observe for the strength [29] s = T a superlinear
i j ij
behavior with the degree. This result demonstrates that
a. The Steiner problem. More generally, finding a sub-
theexistenceofdegree-trafficcorrelationsasobservedfor
graph that optimizes a global cost function is a very im-
theairportnetwork[29]couldemergefromaglobalopti-
portant problem. The Steiner tree is one of the classical
mization process. The spatial properties of the OTT are
(NP-complete) problem which is still studied now [45]
alsoremarkableanddisplays(Fig.61)ahierarchicalspa-
becauseofitsimportanceinmanyfieldssuchasnetwork
tial organization where long links connect regional hubs,
reconstruction in biology, Internet multicasting, circuit
that, in turn are connected to sub-regional hubs, etc.
and distribution network design. It is defined as follow-
Case (µ,ν) = (1,1). The energy is then given by ing: given a graph with positive weights, it consists in
finding a connected subgraph of minimum weight that
55
contains a selected set of ‘terminal’ vertices. Such a sub- 4. Adding two antagonistic quantities
graph may require the addition of some ‘non-terminal’
nodes which are called Steiner nodes (see Fig. 62 for an After having briefly reviewed the important optimal
illustration of the three nodes problem). The difference networks such as the MST and the SPT, we now discuss
betweentheSteinertreeproblemandtheminimumspan- some examples which were recently proposed in the lit-
ning tree problem is that in the Steiner tree problem ex- erature. In particular, many models of optimal networks
tra intermediate vertices and edges may be added to the minimize a functional E which is the sum of two terms
graph in order to reduce the length of the spanning tree. which have have antagonistic behavior
E =λE +(1−λ)E (205)
1 2
whereλ∈[0,1]andwhereE isforexampleadecreasing
1
function of the number of links and could represent the
efficiency(suchastheaverageshortestpathforexample)
and where E is an increasing function of the number of
2
links for example and could represent the cost as mea-
sure by the total length for example (see Fig. 63). This
interplaywillleadinmanycasetointerestingsolutions.
FIG. 62 Example of the Steiner tree for three points A,
B, and C. The Steiner point S is located at the Fermat
point of the triangle ABC and minimizes the total distance
d(S,A)+d(S,B)+d(S,C). Theanglesareequal(SB,SA)=
(SA,SC)=(SC,SA)=2π/3.
In [45], the authors show that this problem can be an-
alyzed with tools – such as the cavity equation – coming
from statistical physics of disordered, frustrated systems
(such as spin glasses, see for example [229]) and can lead FIG. 63 Schematic representation of many optimal network
to new optimization algorithms. models. The functional to minimize is the sum of two terms
which behave in opposite way when adding links. This leads
The Steiner problem is obviously important in trans- in general to a non-trivial optimum.
portation science too, where the nodes are considered as
cities and the Steiner points as junctions. Recent results We will now discuss some simple examples that were
on this topic can be found in [10] where the author pro- consideredintheliterature. Alreadyinthe1970soptimal
poses a rigorous study of the network which minimizes network design was a very active field (see for example
the quantity [52]) and we will focus here on the more recent results.
(cid:88)
E = d f(e)β (202)
e
e a. Link density and average shortest path. Ferrer i Can-
cho and Sol´e [169] minimized the simplest form which is
where β is a positive exponent, d is the length of the
e the combination of the average (normalized by the max-
link e, and where f(e) is a function describing the flow
imum) shortest path
on edge e. In this case, the minimum cost can be shown
to scale as
d=(cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105)/(cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105) (206)
max
(cid:96) (N)∼Nα(β) (203)
T andtheaveragelinkdensityρ=2E/N(N−1)andreads
with
E =λd+(1−λ)ρ (207)
(cid:40)
1−β/2 for β ∈]0,1/2]
where λ ∈ [0,1]. For λ = 0, the energy is the density
α(β)= (204)
(1+β)/2 for β ∈[1/2,1] and the optimal network is a tree. In the opposite case
λ=1, the optimal network minimizes the average short-
There is a transition at β = 1/2 which corresponds to a est path. For intermediate values of λ, Cancho and Sol´e
change of regime where short links dominate to another obtained different networks (see Fig. 64) and in particu-
one where long links dominate [10]. lar argue that one of the regimes is a scale-free network
56
sented by the total length and the total journey time
leading to a variety of behaviors. If we constrain the
routes to have m average hops, then the minimal total
length scales as [11]
(cid:96) (N)∼Nβ(m) (210)
T
where the following bounds are obtained: β(2) = 3/2,
β(3) = 13/10, β(4) = 7/6. The exponent thus decreases
when m increases which is expected since a smaller av-
erage number of hops implies a stronger constraint and
thus a longer network. Conversely, if we require the net-
work length (cid:96) to scale as N, then the average shortest
T
path scales as lnlnN [11].
In [134] an effective length is assigned to each edge
(cid:96)˜ =δ+(1−δ)d (i,j) (211)
ij E
and the effective distance on a route π =e e ...e be-
1 2 m
tween two nodes is given by
FIG. 64 Optimal networks obtained with the minimization
of Eq. (207) for different values of λ. The y−axis represents
(cid:88)
the degree entropy H = −(cid:80) kp klogp k and is small for a mδ+(1−δ) d e (212)
heterogeneous network (and large for a lattice). From [169]. e∈π
whichisAldous’expressionEq.(208)withthecorrespon-
with a broad distribution of degrees. They obtained for dence∆↔δanda↔(1−δ). GastnerandNewman[134]
the network denoted by ‘B’ in Fig. 64 a power law with then weight the distance with a passenger number w ij
exponent −2, for a network of size N = 100 (obviously and minimize a combination ofthe form (cid:96) T(G)+γT(G).
better statistics on larger networks would be necessary Wenoteherethatthismodelwasalsousedtogetherwith
to confirm this result, but this is not an obvious task). a gravity model for computing w ij in [5] where the au-
This shows that optimization might be a candidate for thors compared the resulting optimal network and the
explaining the emergence of scale-free features. real-worldIndianairlinenetworkandfoundagoodagree-
ment. Gastner and Newman found then for example
optimal networks shown in Fig. 65. In particular, this
b. Total length and average shortest path. Aldous [11]
studied the network which minimizes the total length
subject to the average number of hops. More precisely
the cost associated to a route π(i,j) = e e ...e going
1 2 m
from node i to node j is
(cid:88)
C(π)=m∆+a d (208)
e
e∈π
where ∆ and a are two constants (in [11], the quantity
√
a is chosen to scale as 1/ N in order to obtain terms of
thesameorderofmagnitude). Thequantity∆measures
the cost of connections and we expect that the larger it
is and the smaller the number of hubs (and the longer
the spokes). The journey time associated to a graph G FIG. 65 Optimal networks obtained with the minimization
is then proportional to of Eq. (212) for different values of δ. From [134].
(cid:88)
T(G)= min C[π(i,j)] (209) figure illustrates the expected behavior when the con-
π(i,j) nectioncostincreases(similarresultswereobtainedwith
i(cid:54)=j
the same model in [136]): for δ =0, the connection cost
(where π(i,j) is the set of paths from i to j). The total is zero, only distance counts and the resulting network
(cid:80)
lengthofthegraphis(cid:96) T(G)= ijA ijd E(i,j)andrepre- is essentially a minimal length network, such as a pla-
sents the cost (if we assume that the cost is proportional narnetworkofroadsforexample. Whenδ increases,and
tothelengthofconnectionbetweentwoadjacentnodes). thusthecostassociatedtoconnections,weseefewerhubs
We thus can have an interplay between the cost repre- andlongerspokes(thelimitbeingonehubandthecorre-
57
and that the smaller e, the more stable the synchronized
solutions. Donettietal. [111]proposedtoconstructnet-
works with a fixed number of nodes and average degree
and which optimize synchronizability (ie. minimizing e).
The optimal networks are not small-world networks and
display peaked distributions of degree, betweenness, av-
erageshortestpaths, andofloops. Animportantfeature
of these networks is that there have a very entangled
structure with short (cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105), large loops and no well-defined
structure. In a recent article [62], Brede extended this
problemandproposedtominimizeboththetotalamount
of wire (cid:96) (G) to connect the network and the synchro-
T
FIG. 66 Optimal networks obtained with the minimization nizability characterized by e
of Eq. (213) for different values of λ. From [61].
E =λ(cid:96) (G)+(1−λ)e (216)
T
Starting with a one-dimensional chain for λ=0, one ob-
spondingnetworkistheSPT).AsnotedbyAldous[11],it
tains the complete graph which minimizes the synchro-
would be interesting to obtain more quantitative results
nizability. For λ = 1, the 1d line is optimal and for
inordertobeabletocomparewithsomereal-worlddata
intermediate values of λ one obtains the networks shown
for example.
in Fig. 67. Most links are small and the link length l
In [61], Brede also revisited recently this problem in
terms of a communication infrastructure with
E =λ(cid:96) (G)+(1−λ)(cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105) (213)
T
In a communication context, the total length represents
thecostassociatedwiththewiresandtheaverageshort-
est path is a measure of the communication efficiency.
The number of links is not limited and the nodes are lo-
cated on a regular lattice of dimension d with periodic
boundary conditions. For λ=0, we obtain the complete
graphwhichminimizes(cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105)andforλ=1weobtainamin-
imumspanningtree(anddependingonthedimensionwe
can obtain a chain or a star network). For intermediate
values of λ, we obtain different networks interpolating FIG.67 (a-d)Examplesofnetworksconstructedfordifferent
between these two extremes (see Fig. 66). values of λ = 0.05, 0.3, 0.8, and 0.95. (e-h) Corresponding
linklengthdistributionforthesedifferentvaluesofλ. Straight
lines in (f-h) represent power laws with exponent 1.05, 1.44,
and 1.5, respectively. From [62].
c. Totallengthandsynchronization. A wide range of sys-
tems can be described by a system of oscillators coupled
throughanetworkofcontactsandsynchronizationprob- distribution goes from a peak distribution to a broader
lems have attracted a lot of attention (for a review on law. ApowerlawfitoftheformP(l)∼l−α givesavalue
synchronization in complex networks see [18]). If each of the exponent in the range [1,1.5] (for a random graph
of the oscillator is described by its individual dynamics with the same degree distribution and no total length
by φ˙ =f(φ ), the dynamics of the coupled oscillators is constraint, the length distribution is uniform and when
i i
governed by the following equation there is a total length constraint, the distribution is ex-
ponential). This result means that small-world networks
φ˙ =f(φ )+σ(cid:88) A [h(φ )−h(φ )] (214) can display optimal synchronization but with shortcuts
i i ij j i
j covering many different length scales.
In another paper [63], the same author studied the
where h is a given output function. The stability of syn-
trade-off between enhanced synchronization and total
chronizedsolutionsisrelatedtotheeigenvaluesλ =0≤
0 length of wire but allowing the nodes to rearrange them-
λ ≤ ··· ≤ λ of the graph Laplacian. More precisely,
1 N selves in space with the constraint that the average Eu-
Pecora and Carroll [257] showed that the stability is re-
clideandistanceamongnodesisconstant. Inthismodel,
lated to the ratio -sometimes called ‘synchronizability’
depending on the cost of wire, one observes different or-
defined as
ganization in modules: when the cost of wire λ increases
λ one observes an organization in a large number of mod-
e= N (215)
λ ules connected on a ring.
1
58
5. Beyond trees: noise and loops therefore one link with infinite resistance in the system
and the dissipated power Pe is infinite. The finiteness of
In most examples studied in literature (including the R implies the existence of loops in the optimal network.
ones presented above), the optimal networks are trees. In another model, [187] Katifori introduces time fluctu-
Howeverinmanynaturalnetworkssuchasveinsinleaves atingloadbyintroducingasystemwithonesourceatthe
or insect wings, one observe many loops. Very recently, stem of the leaf and one single moving sink at position
twostudieswhichappearedsimultaneously[98,187]pro- a. For this system, one can compute the total dissipated
posedpossiblereasonsfortheexistenceofahighdensity power Pa and resilience to fluctuations can be rephrased
of loops in many real optimal networks. In particular, it as the minimization of the functional
seems that the existence of fluctuations is crucial in the
(cid:88)
formation of loops. Maybe more related to the botanic F = Pa (220)
evolution of leaves, the resilience to damage also natu- a
rally induces a high density of loops (see Fig. 68 for an
example of flow re-routing after an injury).
FIG. 68 Re-routing of the flow around an injury in a lemon
leaf. From [187].
In these studies, the model is defined on a network
with conductances C on each link and where the total
e
power
1(cid:88) (cid:88)
P = C (V −V )2 (217)
2 kj k j
k j∈Γ(k)
is minimized under the cost condition
1(cid:88) (cid:88)
Cγ =1 (218)
2 jk
k j∈Γ(k)
where in this equation it is assumed that the cost of a
conductanceC isgivenbyCγ whereγisarealnumber.
kj kj
Following [187], we can introduce two variants of this
model. The first one which represents the resilience to FIG.69 Optimalnetworksfortheresiliencetodamage(left)
and to a fluctuating load (right panels). From [187].
damageisdefinedasfollows. Wecutalinkeandcompute
forthissystemthetotaldissipatedpowerdenotedbyPe.
In these models, one observes the formation of loops
The resilience to this damage can then be rephrased as
(see Fig. 69), reminiscent of the ones seen in real leaves.
the minimization of the functional
These recent studies shed a new light in the formation
R= (cid:88) Pe (219) and the evolution of real-world networks and open inter-
esting directions of research. In particular, it would be
e∈E
very interesting to understand more quantitatively the
Note that if breaking e disconnects the network, there is condition of appearance of loops for example.
59
F. Summary: Effect of space on networks topology (degree) and non-topological quantities
such as weights or distances.
We presented in this chapter the most important
classes of models of spatial networks formation. When • Space and optimal networks
spatial constraints are present, the network structure is
affected and we summarize the main effects below.
Spatial constraints combined with efficiency lead
toalargevarietyofnetworks,withtheexistenceof
• Effect of space embedding on degree distribution,
hub-and-spoke organization. Also, the emergence
assortativity, clustering, and average shortest path
of complex structure in traffic organization could
be explained by an optimization principle. In par-
Spatialconstraintsimplythatthetendencytocon- ticular, strong correlations between distance and
nect to hubs is limited by the need to use small- traffic arise naturally as a consequence of optimiz-
range links. This explains why the degree distri- ing the average weighted shortest path. In the op-
butionhasacut-offdependingonthenodedensity timal network, long-range links carry large traffic
andthealmostflatbehaviorobservedfortheassor- and connect regional hubs dispatching traffic on a
tativity. Connection costs also favor the formation smaller scale ensuring an efficient global distribu-
of cliques between spatially close nodes and thus tion. Theseresultssuggestthattheorganizationof
increase the clustering coefficient. The increasing thetrafficoncomplexnetworksandmoregenerally
tendency to establish connections in the geograph- thearchitectureofweightednetworkscouldinpart
ical neighborhood leads to a large average shortest result from an evolutionary process. In the case of
path. If the density of shortcuts is too low, the optimal networks, fluctuations and resilience to at-
average shortest path can behave as N1/d as in a tackleadnaturallytotheformationofloopswhich
d−dimensionallattice. Intheoppositecase,alarge shedsomelightontheevolutionofvarioussystems.
densityofshortcutsleadstoalogarithmicbehavior
typical of small-world networks.
V. PROCESSES ON SPATIAL NETWORKS
• Effect of space embedding on centrality
Wewillfocusinthischapteronvariousprocesseswhich
Spatial constraints also induce large betweenness take place on spatial networks and the guiding idea is to
centralityfluctuations. Whilehubsareusuallyvery focus on the effects of space. In this respect, we will not
central,whenspaceisimportantcentralnodestend addressthegeneralresultsconcerningcomplexscale-free
togetclosertothegravitycenterofallpoints. Cor- networks as there are already many reviews and books
relations between spatial position and centrality on these (see for example [32, 87, 245]) but we will try
competewiththeusualcorrelationsbetweendegree toaddressspecificallyeffectswhichcan be relatedtothe
andcentrality,leadingtotheobservedlargefluctu- spatial aspects of networks. In particular, we will essen-
ations of centrality at fixed degree: many paths go tially focus on studies using the small-world model with
through the neighborhood of the barycenter, rein- shortcutslocatedatrandomonad-dimensionalunderly-
forcing the centrality of less-connected nodes that inglattice. Thismodelwhichinterpolatesnicelybetween
happen to be in the right place; this yields larger a ‘pure’ spatial lattice and a ‘pure’ random graph with
fluctuations of the betweenness centrality and a oneparameteronly,representsaninterestingplayground
larger number of ‘anomalies’. to test theoretical ideas and models.
We will discuss six different processes. We will begin
• Effect of spatial embedding on topology-traffic with the study of Ising model on spatial networks as it
correlations represents the archetype of phase transition and could
be used in the modelling of very different systems. We
As we can see with growing network models where will then discuss random walks and synchronization on
preferential attachment plays a role, spatial con- spatial networks, followed by the important problem of
straints induce strong nonlinear correlations be- navigating and searching in a spatial network. We will
tween topology and traffic. The reason for this then discuss the robustness and resilience of spatial net-
behavioristhatspatialconstraintsfavortheforma- works, having in mind more practical examples such as
tion of regional hubs and reinforce locally the pref- the robustness of power grids for example. Finally, we
erentialattachment, leadingforagivendegreetoa will discuss the effect of space on the spread of disease.
larger strength than the one observed without spa-
tial constraints. Moreover, long-distance links can
connect only to hubs, which yields a non-linear be- A. Ising model
havior of the distance-strength with values β >1:
d
theexistenceofconstraintssuchasspatialdistance It is well known in statistical physics that long-range
selection induces some strong correlations between interactions affect the behavior of most systems (see for
60
example [240]) and we expect that long shortcuts in the • The upper critical dimension of the Ising model is
small-worldlatticewillindeedchangethethermodynam- d = 4 which means that above 4, the critical ex-
c
ics of the usual Ising model on a regular lattice. In this ponentsarethoseofthemean-fieldobtainedinthe
section,westartbyrecallingthemainresultsontheIsing infinite dimensional case.
model on lattices and we will then review the results on
spatialnetworkssuchastheWatts-Strogatzsmall-world, • In the infinite dimensional case or equivalently in
and Apollonian networks. We will end this section with the case of a fully connected graph, the behavior
a general discussion on the effect of a spatial embedding of the Ising model is completely understood with
on the critical behavior of phase transitions. the so-called mean-field theory. This approach is
appropriate when the number of neighbors is very
large, in which case fluctuations are negligible and
only the average number of spins up and down is
1. Generalities on the Ising model on lattices
important.
The Ising model is a pillar of statistical physics and
numerous books and reviews can be found on this sub-
2. Ising model on small-world networks
ject. It was developed and studied in the framework of
phasetransitions,butthesimplicityoftheIsingmodelis
The first studies on the Ising model were done on lat-
themainreasonforitsubiquityandforitsvariousappli-
tices and later on planar networks. In particular, the
cations to many fields, even far from traditional physics.
criticalbehavioronarandomplanarlatticehasbeenelu-
Indeed, in a first approach it is tempting for example to
cidatedbyBoulatovandKazakovinanimportantpaper
describe the behavior of an agent by a binary variable.
[59]. More recently, Ising models were also studied on
It could be the answer ‘yes’ or ‘no’ to a certain question
complex networks (see for example [32]) and we will fo-
or the choice between ‘A’ or ‘B’ for example. The Ising
cus here on the Watts-Strogatz network where we will
modelthenappearsasaveryusefulmodelfordescribing
discuss the effect of long-range links on the nature and
collective phenomena in social systems, such as opinion
existence of a transition in the model.
formation and dynamics for example (for applications of
In the complex network field, very quickly after Watts
statistical physics to social systems, we refer the inter-
and Strogatz published their paper, Barrat and Weigt
ested reader to the review [76] and references therein).
[28]studiedtheone-dimensionalWSmodelwhereatp=
The Ising model is usually defined on a lattice and
0,thenetworkisaone-dimensionalringwhereeachnode
on each node, there is an Ising spin which is an object
isconnectedtoits2mnearestneighborsbyferromagnetic
whichcantaketwovaluesonly: σ =±1. Theinteraction
i bonds. In this situation the transition temperature is
between spins is described by the Hamiltonian
T =0 and the question is how the long-range links will
c
modify this one-dimensional result. In [28], the authors
(cid:88)
H =− J ijσ iσ j (221) use the replica approach to study this problem. They
i(cid:54)=j found that at high temperature, the paramagnetic phase
is stable for any value of p. For small values of p, an
where J represents the energy gain if two spins are
ij expansion in terms of pξ can be performed where ξ ∼
aligned. The usual ferromagnetic Ising model on a lat- 0 0
exp(Jm(m + 1)/T) is the correlation length of the 1d
tice is obtained for J = J > 0 for neighbors on a lat-
ij system, and implies that the first order approximation
tice. At zero temperature T = 0, the ground state of
breaks down for pξ ∼ 1. This result means that for
the Hamiltonian Eq. (221) with ferromagnetic couplings 0
finite p, there is a transition temperature given by [28]
is obtained for all spins aligned and the magnetization
(cid:80)
is then M = iσ i/N = ±1. Depending on the dimen- 1
sionofthelattice,weobtaindifferentcollectivebehaviors T c ∼ logp (222)
that we recall here briefly (for the ferromagnetic case).
We can understand this result using the following argu-
• For one-dimensional systems, the ordered ferro- ment. In the one-dimensional Ising model, the correla-
magnetic configuration is obtained only for T = 0 tion length is ξ which is the typical size of domains of
0
and there is no phase transition at finite tempera- correlatedspins(ie. havingthesamevalue). Theaverage
ture. numberoflong-rangelinksconnectedtoadomainisthen
of order pξ and it is thus clear that when pξ (cid:29) 1 the
0 0
• For d ≥ 2, the situation is different: at tempera- numerous shortcuts will lead to a mean-field behavior.
tureslowenough,anorderedstateispossible(with In [155], Herrero studied numerically the Ising model
M = ±1) while at high temperature this order is on WS networks constructed with lattice of larger di-
destroyed and M = 0 (for large N). The compe- mensions (d = 2, 3). In these networks, the presence
tition between the thermal agitation and the in- of disorder, even small, leads to a change of universality
teraction leads in fact to a non-zero temperature class going from Ising like at p = 0 to mean-field type
transition T >0 (for N →∞). forp>0(assignalledbymean-fieldvaluesofthecritical
c
61
exponents). The 1d argument for the transition temper- ρ(λ)isvanishingfasterorslowerthanλ −λclosetothe
c
ature is also still correct and T is such that the spin edge.
c
correlation length ξ 0 is of order the typical size of small- For homogeneous networks (obtained with θ i = θ),
world clusters N∗ ∼ 1/p (see section IV.C.1) leading to Bradde et al. recovered in the exponential case for J(r)
the behavior the classical Ginsburg result stating that for d < 4 crit-
ical fluctuations are relevant. For a power law behavior
T c(p)∼−1/logp (223) J(r) ∼ r−α, the mean-field approximation is exact for
d < α < 3d/2 and for α > 3d/2, non-trivial exponents
for d=1, and for d>1:
are expected. For α < d, a non-zero gap appears in the
spectrum suggesting a mean-field behavior. In addition,
T (p)−T (0)∼p1/νd (224)
c c Bradde et al. studied the case of complex networks em-
bedded in a d = 2 space with a power-law degree distri-
Chatterjee and Sen [79] and Chang, Sun, Cai [78]
butionwithexponentγ andwithanexponentialfunction
studied the Ising model on one-dimensional WS network
forJ(r)=exp(−r/d ). Forsmalld theeffectofspaceis
with shortcuts whose length is distributed according to 0 0
P((cid:96)) ∼ (cid:96)−α (see [195] and section IV.C.2). Accord- importantandweexpectnon-trivialeffectsofspacewith
a spectrum close to λ behaving as ρ(λ) ∼ (λ − λ)δ.
ing to [79], there is a finite transition temperature for c c
For instance, they showed that for γ = 4 the mean-field
0<α<2. Their results seem to indicate that for α<1
behavior holds while for a larger value γ =6, the critical
the behavior is mean-field and that for 1 < α < 2, the
fluctuations are not captured by the mean-field. From a
systemhasafinite-dimensionalbehavior. Thislastresult
moregeneralperspective,thesefirstresultsseemtoindi-
is however still under debate as in [78] the numerical re-
cate that this approach opens interesting perspectives in
sultsseemtoindicatethatforthewholerange0<α<2,
theunderstandingofphasetransitionsinspatialcomplex
the behavior is mean-field like.
networks.
The Ising model was also studied on Apollonian net-
works in [178] where it is shown that for a model with
decaying interaction constants of the form J ∝ n−α
n
(where n denotes the generation number), the critical
B. Random walks in spatial networks
temperature depends on the number of generations n as
T (n)∼nτ(α) where τ varies continuously from τ(0)=1
c
Randomwalksongraphsisanimportantandoldsub-
toτ(∞)=1/2indicatinganewkindofcriticalbehavior.
jectinbothstatisticalphysicsandinmathematics. Many
bookscanbefoundonthissubject(seeforexample[315])
and in this chapter we will focus on how shortcuts in a
3. Critical fluctuations
Watts-Strogatz network will affect the usual lattice be-
havior. Formoreresultsanddetailsonrandomwalkson
In [60], Bradde et al. investigate from a general point
general complex networks, we refer the interested reader
of view the role of the spatial embedding on the critical
to the review [54] or to the book [32]. We also note that
behavior of phase transitions. They considered the Ising
random walks are also studied in connection with spec-
model as a prototype for studying the complex behavior
tral graph theory and we refer the interested reader to
induced by space. The Ising spins are located on the
the book [83].
nodesofad−dimensionaleuclideanspaceandtwonodes
i and j are connected with a probability p which reads
ij
p (cid:39)θ θ J(|r −r |) (225)
ij i j i j
1. Quantifying the effect of shortcuts
wherer denotesthepositionofnodei(j). Thehidden
i(j)
variables θ are found by fixing some conditions such as The random walk can easily be defined on a
i
the average degree for example. d−dimensional lattice, for example in Zd where the
The important quantity here appears to be the spec- walker jumps at every time step to one of its 2d neigh-
trum ρ(λ) associated to the matrix p (which is similar bor with equal probability. We just recall here the most
ij
to the adjacency matrix). We denote by Λ its largest important results.
eigenvalue, and by λ the spectral edge equal to the av- If we denote by p the probability that a walker at
c ij
erage value of the second largest eigenvalue λ = (cid:104)λ (cid:105) node i will jump to node j, the master equation for the
c 2
and such that for λ < λ the spectrum is self-averaging. probability P(i,t|i ,0) that a walker starting at node i
c 0 0
The spectral gap is defined as ∆ ≡ Λ−λ . Under the at time t=0 is visiting the node i at time t is
N c
assumption that the gap is self-averaging in the thermo-
(cid:88)
dynamic limit and ∆ → ∆, Bradde et al. distinguish ∂ P(i,t|i ,0)= A p P(j,t|i ,0)−A p P(i,t|i ,0)
N t 0 ji ji 0 ij ij 0
twopossiblebehaviorsaccordingtothevalue∆. If∆>0
j
when T → T , the fluctuations are mean-field. If ∆ = 0 (226)
c
then the fluctuations are mean-field or not depending if where A is the adjacency matrix. A usual choice for
ij
62
the transition rate is given by leading to the following long time limit
r
p = (227)
PER(t)∼e−at1/3
(235)
ij k 0
i
where a and c are non-universal parameters. In the case
where k is the degree of node i. This choice corre-
i of the ER random graph the return probability thus de-
sponds to the case of uniform jumping probabilities to
(cid:80) creases faster than the lattice: the random links allow
the neighbors of i and where r = p is the total
j ij the walker to explore other regions of the network and
escape rate. With this simple choice, the stationary so-
make its return more difficult.
lution of Eq. (226) is
If we now think of a d-dimensional variant of the
k Watts-Strogatz (see section IV.C.1), we add a fraction
P(i,∞|i 0,0)= N(cid:104)i
k(cid:105)
(228) pofshortcutstoad−dimensionallatticeandthenatural
question is how these shortcuts will affect the diffusion
process. This problem was studied numerically in [174]
andananalyticalanswerwasgivenbyMonassonin[235]
whoshowedthattheeigenvaluedensityfortheWSmodel
a. Returnprobability. Manyimportantquantitiescanbe can be approximately written as
calculated with the use of the (modified) Laplacian op- √
erator on the network which can defined as ρ (λ)∼ρ (λ)×ρ (λ)∼λd/2−1e−p/ λ (236)
WS L ER
L =k δ −A (229) leadingtothefollowingbehaviorforthereturnprobabil-
ij i ij ij
ity
where k is the degree of node i. The link between ran-
i (cid:40)
dom walks on graph and spectral graph theory is known t−d/2 t(cid:28)t
1
P (t)−P (∞)∼ (237)
for a long time (see for example [83]). In particular, the 0 0 e−(p2t)1/3 t(cid:29)t
1
eigenvalue density ρ(λ) of this operator gives the return
probability P (t) (which is the probability that starting
0 where P (∞)=1/N, and where t is the crossover time.
0 1
from the origin the walker returns to it at time t)
In the first regime, at short times, the walker didn’t en-
(cid:90) ∞ counter shortcuts and we recover the d-dimensional be-
P (t)= e−λtρ(λ)dλ (230) havior. After a time t, the volume explored is of order
0
0 V ∼ td/2 and the number of shortcuts in this volume is
givenbypV. ThecrossovertimeisthussuchthatpV ∼1
Thisrelationimpliesinparticularthatthelongtimelimit
leading to
of P (t) is controlled by the behavior of ρ(λ) for λ→0.
0
For example, for a d−dimensional lattice, the spectral t ∼1/p2/d (238)
1
density behaves as [119]
After this time, the walkers ‘feel’ the small-world nature
ρ (λ)∼λd/2−1 (231) of the network and we recover the ER behavior given by
L
a stretched exponential.
which gives the classical result
1
PL(t)∼ (232) b. Number of distinct nodes, mean-square displacement and
0 td/2
first-time return probability. In [13], the authors study
This quantity allows us to construct a typology of walks the effect of shortcuts on different quantities such as the
for infinite lattice. For finite lattices, the walk is always number N cov of distinct sites visited at time t (which
recurrent and for infinite lattice, the nature of the walk wasalsostudiedin[172]), themean-squaredisplacement
can be characterized by the behavior of the quantity (cid:104)r2(t)(cid:105) and the first-return time distribution.
In the case of d-dimensional lattices and with a tran-
(cid:90) T sition probability p =1/k , Dvoretzky and Erdos [117]
I = P (t)dt (233) ij i
0 studied the average number of distinct sites and found
0
the following behavior
for T → ∞. We thus find the usual results, namely
√
that for d ≤ 2, the walk is recurrent and for d ≥ 3 it is t d=1

transient. N (t)∼ t/lnt d=2 (239)
cov
In the case of an ER graph, Rodgers and Bray [267] t d≥3
showed that the density of states behaves as
In the case of a one-dimensional WS network with a
√
ρ (λ)∼e−c/ λ (234) probability p to have a shortcut and an average num-
ER
63
ber of shortcuts given by x = pN, these behaviors will
be modified and simple scaling arguments can help us
to understand the effect of the shortcuts [13]. In the
WS network, the typical size of a cluster is ξ ∼ 1/p
(see section IV.C.1) and for a time t (cid:28) ξ2, the random
walker doesn’t encounter any shortcuts and we expect
√
a lattice-like behavior with N ∼ t. For very large
cov
times t (cid:29) Nξ, the walker has visited the whole net-
work and we have N ∼ N. For intermediate times
cov
ξ2 (cid:28) t (cid:28) Nξ, the walker spends on average a time
t ∼ ξ2 before encountering a shortcut. At time t the
1
number of shortcuts and thus of different segments vis-
itedist/t ∼t/ξ2andthetotalnumberofdistinctvisited
1
sites is then N ∼ (t/ξ2)×ξ2 ∼ t [13, 172]. We can
cov
summarize these behaviors in the following scaling form
t
N =NS( ,x) (240)
cov ξ2
with
√
y/x, y (cid:28)1

S(y,x)∼ y/x, 1(cid:28)y (cid:28)x (241)
1,
y (cid:29)x
This scaling is confirmed by the excellent collapse ob-
served numerically (see Fig. 70).
Asimilarlineofreasoningcanbeappliedtothemean-
square displacement (cid:104)r2(t)(cid:105) where the distance is here
computedintermsofhopsfromtheorigin(ie. thelength FIG.70 (a)Rescalednumberofdistinctsitesvisitedattimet
versustherescaledtime. Thesymbolscorrespondtodifferent
oftheshortestpathfromtheorigintothenodewherethe
values of x (circles: x = 10, squares: x = 102, stars: x =
walker is located). On a d-dimensional lattice the mean-
103) and for each value of x two values of p are used (0.0002
square displacement behaves as (cid:104)r2(t)(cid:105) ∼ t, a behavior
and 0.01). The collapse is very good making it difficult to
that we expect on the WS networks for times such that
identify thetwocurves foreachx. (b)Rescaledmean-square
t(cid:28)ξ2. For large times, the mean-squared displacement displacement versus rescaled time showing a perfect collapse
saturates to a value equal to the diameter squared (we (foreachxtherearetwocurvesfortwodifferentvaluesofp).
recall here that the diameter is defined as the maximum From [13].
of all distances between pairs and is well approximated
bytheaverageshortestpath(cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105))andthesaturationthus
reads (cid:104)r2(t)(cid:105)→(cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105)2. These behaviors can be encoded in
the following scaling form [13] decaying as p|r−r(cid:48)|−α. The exponent α thus character-
izes the length of shortcuts and the p is essentially the
t probability of a site to have a shortcut. Analytical cal-
(cid:104)r2(t)(cid:105)=(cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105)2R( ,x) (242)
ξ2 culations are simpler in the case (which is believed not
to modify the universality) where multiple links are al-
with lowed with a Poisson distribution of links with average
(cid:40) p/N|r−r(cid:48)|α where N is a normalization constant.
y/(cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105)2 t(cid:28)ξ2
R(y,x)∼ (243) The equation studied in [198] and which describes the
1 t(cid:29)ξ2
random walk process is
which is confirmed numerically (see Fig. 70). ∂ P(r,t)=−(cid:88) (∆ +q∆rand)P(r(cid:48),t) (244)
t rr(cid:48) rr(cid:48)
r(cid:48)
2. Diffusion on power law Watts-Strogatz networks where P(r,t) is the probability to find the walker at site
r at time t, −∆ is the discretized Laplace (diffusion)
rr(cid:48)
In [198], Kozma, Hastings and Korniss study diffusion operator. For example for d = 1, one has −∆ M =
ij j
in a d−dimensional Watts-Strogatz networks of linear M −M −(M −M ) giving
i+1 i i i−1
size L where the shortcuts are connecting two nodes i
anj (locatedatr andr(cid:48),respectively)withaprobability ∆ =2δ −δ −δ (245)
ij i,j j,i−1 j,i+1
64
The quantity −∆rand is the diffusion operator for the C. Synchronization
rr(cid:48)
random links with diffusion coefficient q. On the d = 1
lattice, one has ∆rand = δ (cid:80) J −J where J is Many natural phenomena can be described as a set of
ij ij l(cid:54)=i il ij ij
the number of links connecting the nodes i and j. coupledoscillators. Thisisthecaseforcardiaccells,fire-
flies, etc. The synchronization properties depend on the
The Green’s function G(r,r(cid:48),t) for this model is the coupling pattern and many studies were devoted to the
solution of the equation (244) with the initial condition effect of the coupling network structure (see the review
G(r,r(cid:48),t = 0) = δ(r − r(cid:48)). The Fourier transformed [18]).
Green’s function in the limit ω →0 Eachoscillatoricanbedescribedbyascalardegreeof
freedomφ andeachunitevolvesaccordingtoaninternal
G(r,r(cid:48))= lim(iω+∆+q∆rand)−1(r,r(cid:48)) (246) dynamicsi governed by φ˙ = f(φ ). If these oscillators
ω→0 i i
are linearly coupled by a network, the output is a linear
averagedoverdisordergivesatranslationinvariantquan- superposition of of the outputs of the neighboring units
tity depending on |r −r(cid:48)| only. For r = r(cid:48), we obtain and the evolution equations take the form of
(cid:104)G(0)(cid:105) which is related to the return probability (and is
infactthequantityI definedinEq.(233))anditsscaling dφ i =f(φ )+σ(cid:88) C h(φ ) (247)
with the size L → ∞ determines if the random walk is dt i ij j
i
transient or recurrent.
where C is the coupling matrix, σ is the interaction
ij
Theauthorsof[198]usedaself-consistentperturbation strength and h a fixed output function. An important
theoryandobtainedthephasediagramforalldimensions case corresponds to C = L where L is the graph
ij ij
and values of α (a detailed version of this work can be Laplacian. In an important paper, Pecora and Carroll
found in [199]). The results in the one-dimensional case [257] showed that the stability of synchronized solutions
canbesummarizedinthefigure(71)whereacomparison is related to the ratio
is made with an annealed approximation where ∆rand is
replacedbyitsaverage. Inparticular,ford=1,thesere- e= λ N (248)
λ
1
and that the smaller e, the more stable the synchronized
solutions.
After Watts and Strogatz published their paper [313]
synchronizationpropertieswerestudiedonSWnetworks
whichshowedthatthesenetworkswerebothabletosus-
tain fast response due to the long-range links and both
coherent oscillations thanks to the large clustering [204].
In particular, the ratio e was determined for SW net-
works[23]whereadditionaledgesarerandomlywiredon
aone-dimensionalring. Theyobtainedthegeneralresult
thatthesmall-worldtopologyexhibitsbettersynchroniz-
ability properties than ordered rings and that it can be
achieved with a small density of shortcuts [163].
Finally,letusmentionthework[218]whichpresentsa
studyofcoherenceinvariousnetworks,includingApollo-
FIG.71 Phasediagramford=1. Theannealedapproxima- nian networks (see [178] and section IV.A.4). The main
tion shows some differences with the self-consistent approxi- result is that for the Apollonian network, the coupling
mationforthequenchedcase. Inthequenchedcase,thewalk threshold beyond which coherence disappears decreases
is transient for α<2 and recurrent for α≥2. From [198]. when the heterogeneity is increased. Also, the transition
to coherence in this case is shown to be of the first order
[218].
sultsareinagreementwiththeanalysispresentedin[173]
whichpredictedα=2asacrossoverbetweenarecurrent
andtransientregime. Inotherwordsforα≥2theshort- D. Navigating and searching
cuts do not affect the lattice behavior while when α<2,
there are long shortcuts leading to entirely different re- 1. Searchable networks
gionsofthenetworks. Theymodifyqualitativelythelat-
tice behavior and make it look like a large d-dimensional The original 1967 experiment of Milgram [230] show-
lattice, in agreement with other processes such as spin ing that the average shortest path in North-America is
models where the mean-field behavior is recovered for around 6 raises a number of questions. The first one is
p(cid:54)=0 (in the case α=0. aboutthestructureofthesocialnetworkanditisnowrel-
65
atively clear that enough shortcuts will modify the scal-
ing of (cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105) and induce a logarithmic behavior. Another
questionraisedbyKleinberg[195]isactuallyhowanode
can find a target efficiently with only a local knowledge
of the network (the answer being trivial if you know the
wholenetwork). Itthusseemsthatinsomewaythesocial
network is search-efficient- or is a searchable or naviga-
blenetwork-meaningthattheshortcutsareeasytofind,
even by having access to local information only. In these
cases, one speaks of navigability or searchability when
the greedy search is efficient.
Thisproblemgoesbeyondsocialnetworksasdecentral-
izedsearches,wherenodesonlypossesslocalinformation
(such as the degree or the location of their neighbors for
example) in complex networks have many applications
ranging from sensor data in wireless sensor networks, lo- FIG. 72 Lower bounds of the exponent governing the be-
cating data files in peer-to-peer networks, finding infor- havior of the average delivery time T as a function of the
mation in distributed databases (see for examples [299] exponent α controlling the distribution of shortcuts. After
[195].
and references therein). It is thus important to under-
stand the efficiency of local search routines and the ef-
fect of the network structure on such decentralized algo-
for α = d for which it scales as log2N while for α (cid:54)= d,
rithms.
it scales faster (as a power of N). This behavior can
In the case of social networks, it seems that they are
be intuitively understood: for α > d, long links are rare
composed by a spatial part constituted of the neighbors
andthenetworklooksessentiallyasalattice(withrenor-
of a node belonging to its spatial neighborhood (such
malized spacing). In the opposite case α < d, shortcuts
as in a regular lattice) and a purely social component,
are all long and not necessarily useful. The best case
not correlated with space and which can connect regions
is obtained when the shortcuts explore all spatial scales,
which are geographically very far apart. In a search pro-
which is obtained for α=d (This result was extended in
cess, it is thus natural to try these links which open the
[266] to the case of small-world network constructed by
way to very different parts of the world (in Milgram’s
adding shortcuts to a fractal set of dimension d ).
experiment it is indeed interesting to note that individ- f
uals were passing the message only according geogra-
phy or proximity in the space of professional activities
[191], as it was known to them that the target individ- 2. Sketch of Kleinberg’s proof
ual was a lawyer). In order to quantify this, Kleinberg
[195] constructed a d-dimensional Watts-Strogatz model Inspired from Kleinberg’s original rigorous derivation
where each node i of the lattice [194] of the bounds shown in Fig. 72, we can give the
following hand-waving arguments in order to grasp some
• (i)isconnectedtoallneighborssuchthattheirlat-
intuitionontheeffectsofthelinkdistributionontheav-
tice distance is less than p (with p≥1).
eragenumberofstepstoreachatargetinadecentralized
• (ii) has q shortcuts to node j with a probability algorithm (we will discuss in detail here for the case for
decreasing with the distance d = 2 but the extension to a generic d is trivial). For
the interested reader, we also note that a detailed study
p(i→j)∼d (i,j)−α (249) of the d=1 case is done in [335], that exact asymptotic
E
resultswereobtainedin[74], andthatthe‘greedy’paths
where α is a tunable parameter. connecting a source to the target were studied in [295]
by defining a greedy connectivity.
The search process is the following one: a message
For α = 2 (and we assume here that p = q = 1), the
needs to be sent to a target node t whose geographical
probability to jump from node u to node v is given by
position is known and a node i which receives the mes-
sageforwardsittooneofitsneighborj thatistheclosest 1 1
(geographically) to t. This is the simplest decentralized P(u→v)= (250)
Z d (u,v)2
algorithmthatwecanconstruct(andwhichrequiresonly E
geographicalinformation). Themostimportantfigureof where Z is the normalization constant given by
merit for this type of algorithm is the delivery time T
(oritsaverageT whichiseasiertoestimateanalytically) (cid:88) 1 (cid:90) N/2 rdr
and its scaling with the number of nodes N. Kleinberg Z = (cid:39)2π
found bounds on the exponent of T (see Fig. 72) and v(cid:54)=ud E(u,v)2 1 r2 (251)
the important result is that the delivery time is optimal (cid:39)2πlnN
66
implying that P(u → v) ∼ 1/lnNd (u,v)2 (here and behaves then as
E
in the following we will use continuous approximation
(cid:90) N/2
and neglect irrelevant prefactors-for rigorous bounds we Z = (cid:88) d (u,v)−α (cid:39)2π r−αrdr
E
referto[194]). FollowingKleinberg[194],wesaythatthe
execution of the algorithm is in phase j when the lattice v(cid:54)=u 1 (254)
distance d from the current node (which is holding the
(cid:18) N(cid:19)2−α
∼
message) is such that 2j ≤ d < 2j+1. The largest phase 2
isthenlnN andthesmallest0whenthemessagereaches
thetargetnode. Thegoalatthispointistocomputethe We assume now that the minimum number of steps to
average number of steps T to reach the target. For this reach the target scales as Nδ. In this case, there is nec-
wedecomposetheproblemincomputingtheaveragetime essarily a last step along a long-range link leading to a
durationT thatthemessagestaysinphasej. Forthiswe node which is different from the target node and which
j
have to compute the probability that the message leaves is in the region U centered at t and of size ∼ pNδ (Fig.
thephasejandjumpsinthedomainB j definedastheset 74). The probability P i that this long-range link leading
ofnodeswithinadistance2j tothetargetnodet(seeFig.
73). ThesizeofthissetB is|B |∼22j andthedistance
j j
FIG. 74 One dimensional representation of Kleinberg’s the-
orem in the case α<2.
to U at step i is given by
q|U|
P ≤ ∼N2δ−2+α (255)
i Z
FIG. 73 Line: jump out of the phase j into the domain B .
j
andtheprobabilitythatithappensatanysteplessthan
Nδ is
between u and any node of B is d(u,v ∈ B ) ≤ 2j+2.
j j
The probability to get out of phase j by using a long- P = (cid:88) P ≤N3δ−2+α (256)
i
range link is thus
i≤Nδ
|B | 1
P ∼ j ∼ (252) Thisprobabilityisnon-zeroonlyif3δ−2+α≥0leading
out (2j+2)2lnN lnN to the minimum possible value for δ such that T ∼Nδ
(the actual exact bound found by Kleinberg is P ≥ 2−α
out
δ = (257)
1/(136lnN). We then have P(T j = i) = [1−P out]iP out min 3
from which we obtain T ∼ lnN. The average time to
j
(thed-dimensionalgeneralizationwouldgiveδ =(d−
reach the target is then min
α)/(d+1)).
lnN In the last case α>2, we will have mostly short links
(cid:88)
T = T j ∼ln2N (253) and the probability to have a link larger than m is given
j=0 by
which is the minimum time obtained for a decentral- (cid:90) N rdr
ized algorithm for α = 2 (and α = d for the general P(d E(u,v)>m)∼
rα (258)
d-dimensional case). m
∼m2−α
WenowconsidertheminimumscalingofT inthecase
α<2(andgeneralpandq). Thenormalizationconstant In the following we will use the notation (cid:15)=α−2. The
67
probability to have a jump larger than Nγ for T < Nβ 1. Random walk: The message goes from a node to
is then given by one of its randomly chosen neighbor.
P(Nγ,T <Nβ)∼qNβ(Nγ)−(cid:15) 2. High-degree search: The node passes the message
(259) to the neighbor which has the largest degree. This
∼qNβ−γ(cid:15)
algorithm is already very efficient for non-spatial
network [2].
This probability will be non-zero for
3. Greedy search: ThisisthealgorithmusedinKlein-
β−γ(cid:15)≥0 (260)
berg’s study [195] and where the node i passes the
Also,ifateverystepduringatimeT ∼Nβ,weperforma message to the neighbor which is the closest to the
jumpofsizeNγ thetraveleddistancemustbeoforderN target (ie. with the smallest d E(i,t)).
which implies that NβNγ ∼ N leading to the condition
4. Algorithms4-8: Thenodepassesthemessagetothe
β +γ = 1. This last condition together with Eq. (260)
neighbor which minimizes a function F[k ,d (i,t)]
leads to the minimum value of β i E
which depends both on the degree of the node and
α−2 its distance to the target. The function F con-
β = (261)
min α−1 sidered here are: (i) F 1[k,d] = d − f(k) where
f(k) is the expected maximum length of an edge
which can be easily generalized to (α−d)/(α−d+1) from a node with degree k; (ii) F [k,d] ∝ dk;
2
in d-dimensions. We thus recover the bounds δ min and (iii) F 3[k,d] = d/k; (iv) F 4[k,d] ∝ dlnk+1; (v)
β min shown in the Fig. 72. F 5[k,d]=d/(lnk+1).
The main result obtained in [299] is that algorithms
(4−8) perform very well and are able to find a path be-
3. Searching in spatial scale-free networks
tween the source and the target whose length is at most
onehopmorethantheaverageshortestpath. Thisresult
Kleinberg thus showed that a simple greedy search
issurprising: thecalculationoftheshortestaveragepath
passing the message to the neighbor which is the nearest
requires the knowledge of the whole network, while the
to the target is then able to find its target in a logarith-
algorithms used here have only local information. This
mic time for a lattice with α=d. The lattice considered
success can be attributed to the fact that the scale-free
in Kleinberg’s paper is a variant of the WS model and
networksconsideredinthisstudyhavehubswhichallows
hasalowdegreeheterogeneity. Whenalargedegreehet-
tofindefficientlythetarget. Itshouldalsobenotedthat
erogeneityispresentitisnotclearthatthegreedysearch
the greedy search performance is not too bad but with
used in [195] will work well, as it might be best to jump
theseveredrawbackthatinsomecasesitdoesn’tfindthe
to a hub even if there is neighbor closer to the target
target and stays stuck in a loop, which never happens
node. In order to understand the effect of heterogene-
with algorithms (4−8). Similar results were obtained
ity in spatial networks, Thadakamalla et al. [299] stud-
for different values of p and σ. These results allow the
ieddecentralizedsearchesinafamilyofspatialscale-free
authors to claim that the class of spatial networks con-
network where the nodes are located in a d-dimensional
sidered here belong to the class of searchable networks.
space:
Theauthorscheckedwiththesedifferentalgorithmsthat
it is also the case for the US airline network.
• With probability 1−p a new node n is added and
is connected to an existing node i with a prefer- Finally, we mention Hajra and Sen [151] who stud-
ential attachment probability weighted by the dis- ied the effect of the transition scale-free/homogeneous
tance (see section IV.D) network ([221] and section IV.D.2.b) on the navigability
for three different search algorithms. In particular, they
Π ∝k F(d (i,j)) (262) showed that the effect of the transition on navigability
n→i i E
is marginal and is the most pronounced on the highest
whereF(d)isadecreasingfunctionofdistance(and degree-based search strategy which is less efficient in the
can be chosen as a power law d−σ or as an expo- power-law regime.
nential exp(−d/d ).
0
• Withprobability p, anewedgeis connectingexist- 4. Navigability and metric space
ing nodes with probability
In [57], Bogun˜´a, Krioukov, and Claffy, studied the
Π ∝k k F(d (i,j)) (263)
i↔j i j E navigability on a network constructed on a hidden met-
ric space (see section IV.A.3) where the probability to
The authors of [299] investigated the following search connect two nodes (with degree k and k(cid:48) drawn from
algorithmswhichcoverabroadspectrumofpossibilities: P(k) ∼ k−γ) lying for example on a one-dimensional
68
space is given by navigability.
In the case of the Internet it is however important to
(cid:18)
d
(cid:19)−α
note that the navigability is not due to the knowledge
r(d;k,k(cid:48))= 1+ (264)
d (k,k(cid:48)) of geography alone. Indeed, the Internet can be mapped
c
to a hyperbolic space [58] but the distance in this hyper-
whereα>1controlstheclustering(thelargerαandthe bolic space encodes multiple factors (such as geography
larger the clustering coefficient) and where d c(k,k(cid:48)) ∼ andalsopolitical,economical,communities,etc.) sothat
kk(cid:48) (other forms are possible). Bogun˜´a, Krioukov and navigability results from a combination of all these fac-
Claffyanalyzedtheresultofagreedyalgorithmonthese tors.
networkswithdifferentvaluesofα andγ andfoundthat
the average shortest path decreases with smaller γ and
largerα. Alargeclusteringanddegreehomogeneitythus
5. Effect of cost
favorsthegreedyalgorithm,asomewhatexpectedresult,
since hubs allow a fast routing and large clustering an
In [215], Li et al. study the navigability on a Watts-
efficient local search. Strong clustering also favors the
Strogatz network constructed on a two-dimensional
fraction of successful paths (ie. finding the target). If
square lattice where the pairs of nodes are connected
γ is too large (larger than 2.6) the percentage of suc-
with a probability p ∼ 1/dα. The important difference
cessful paths becomes too small which is related to the
with the case considered by Kleinberg [195] is that there
small number of hubs. These results can be summarized
is cost associated to the long-range shortcuts and that
inFig.75(d)wherereal-worldnetworksareshowninthe (cid:80)
their number is limited by a total value d (i,j)<Λ
ij E
where Λ represents the amount of resources available for
the shortcuts. Li et al. study in particular the average
delivery time and found numerically that it has a mini-
mum value for α ≈ 3 (and α = 2 for d = 1) suggesting
that the optimal value might be α = d+1 in contrast
with Kleinberg’s result α = d. In addition, the optimal
delivery time seems to behave as N1/d in sharp contrast
withthebehavior(logN)2 obtainedbyKleinberg. These
result suggest that cost constraints are relevant for the
navigability condition and it would be interesting to ex-
tend Kleinberg’s result in this case and to understand
the main mechanisms and how Kleinberg’s derivation is
affected by the cost constraint.
6. Routing in social networks
FIG. 75 (a,b) Success probability p S versus N for various In the study [217], the authors tested the navigabil-
values of γ and for (a) weak clustering and (b) strong clus-
ity on a social network of bloggers and showed that geo-
tering. (c) Success probability p versus γ for various values
S graphicinformationissufficienttoperformglobalrouting
of α and for fixed system size N ≈ 105. (d) The solid line
(as in Kleinberg’s case on a small-world network [195])
separatesthenavigablefromthenon-navigableregion. From
in a non-negligible fraction of cases: for 13% of the pairs
[57].
source-target, the message reaches the target based on
geographic information only. On the other hand, these
clustering-degreedistributionexponentplane(C,γ). The
authors also showed that the probability that two nodes
solidlinesindicatetheseparationbetweenanavigablere-
separated by a distance d decays as P(d) ∼ 1/dα with
gion and a non-navigable one where the efficiency of the
α ≈ 1 (see section III.B.4). We are thus facing an ap-
greedy algorithm decreases with the system size. Inter-
parent contradiction here: for a two-dimensional space
estingly enough, we see that all the real-world examples
(which is a good approximation of the US), the naviga-
ofcommunicationandtransportation,socialandbiologi-
bilityisobtainedforα=2accordingtoKleinberg’sresult
cal networks considered here are in the navigable region.
and not for α = 1 (see previous section). The authors
These various results (summarized in [201]) show that
of [217] suggest in fact that the Kleinberg navigability
many real-world networks are navigable which means
condition can be generalized for different networks and
that they support efficient communication without a
is obtained when the probability P(u,v) that two nodes
global knowledge of the network. From a more theo-
are connected scales as
retical perspective, the authors of [201] suggest the in-
teresting idea that real-world networks have underlying 1
P(u,v)∼ (265)
hiddenmetricspacewhichcouldbeatthesourceoftheir R(u,v)
69
where R(u,v) is the ‘rank’ of v with respect to u and which size diverges at p (which is p = 1/2 for a 2d
c c
which counts the number of individuals living between square lattice and behaves as p ∼1/2d for large dimen-
c
u and v. This result from the argument that distance sions d). At the threshold there is a giant component, or
alone has no meaning and that one should include the infinite percolating cluster which has a universal fractal
density. Indeed, two individuals separated by a distance dimension d independent from the lattice. In addition,
f
of 500 meters in rural areas probably know each other, in the vicinity of p , the correlation length ξ which mea-
c
which is certainly not the case in a dense urban area. If sures the linear size of finite clusters and the probability
the two-dimensional density ρ is uniform, the rank then P foranodetobelongtotheinfinitepercolatingcluster
∞
scales with distance d as scale as
R∼d2 (266) ξ ∼|p −p|−ν (267)
c
P ∼(p−p )β (268)
which leads to P(d) ∼ 1/d2 and the navigability condi- ∞ c
tion α = d is recovered. The navigability condition of wheretheexponentareinthetwodimensionalcaseβ =
2
Kleinberg thus assumes implicitly a uniform density and 5/36, and ν = 4/3 and in the mean-field case (ie. for
2
couldbemodifiedforotherdistributions. Indeed,theau- d≥6) β =1 and ν =1/2.
MF MF
thors of [217] showed that networks based on friendship
The natural question to ask at this point is then the
condition of Eq. (265) are indeed navigable and contain
effect of shortcuts on this standard percolation behav-
discoverable shortcuts. The apparent paradox is thus
ior. In [72, 236], the authors use a generating function
solved: for the social network studied in [217], we ob-
formalism in order to compute various quantities and we
serve R∼d which explains P(d)∼1/d and the network
briefly recall this derivation for the one-dimensional WS
is still navigable.
network where each site is connected to its kth nearest
neighbors and where additional shortcuts are added be-
tween randomly chosen pairs of sites with probability φ,
E. Effect of space on robustness and resilience
giving an average of φkN shortcuts in total. The first
quantity which is needed is the generating function
Many important infrastructures in our modern soci-
etiesarestructuredintheformofnetworksanditisnat-
∞
(cid:88)
ural to question their robustness. Large-scale collapses H(z)= P(n)zn (269)
such as blackouts or Internet outages are spectacular il-
n=0
lustrations of this problem. Indeed, very quickly after
the first publications on small-worlds and scale-free net- whereP(n)denotestheprobabilitythatarandomlycho-
works, the first studies on robustness appeared [88]. In sen node belongs to a cluster of n sites other than the
particular, an important distinction appeared between giantpercolatingcluster. Inotherwords,belowthetran-
robustness in case of random failures and in case of tar- sition H(1) = 1 and above the percolation threshold we
geted attacks. In particular, one of the most important have H(1) = 1−P ∞. The quantity P 0(n) which is the
results [88] states that scale-free networks are very re- probability that a randomly chosen node belongs to a
silient to random failures but very sensitive to targeted cluster of n sites on the underlying lattice is given by
attacks on hubs for example. (for the one-dimensional case and for n>0)
We will review in this chapter, essentially two types
P (n)=npqn−1(1−q)2 (270)
of studies which considered the effect of space on the re- 0
silience of networks. The first type concerns percolation
where q = 1−(1−p)k. We now define the probability
studies which analyze the effect of the underlying lattice
P(m|n)thatthereareexactlymshortcutsemergingfrom
onthebreakingprocess. Otherstudiesconsideredtheef-
a cluster of size n and which is given by
fects of additional shortcuts on lattice with the study of
Watts-Strogatz networks. Another set of studies focused (cid:18) 2φkN(cid:19)(cid:104)n(cid:105)m(cid:104) n(cid:105)2φkN−m
on the vulnerability of power grids and on the failure P(m|n)= 1− (271)
m N N
cascade process.
which indeed represents the number of possible ways to
choose m end shortcuts with uniform probability n/N
1. Percolation and small-worlds
within a total of 2φkN.
If we assume that there are no loops involving short-
Thetopologicaleffectoftheremovalofbondsornodes
cuts, we can now write a recursive equation on H(z) by
can be understood in the framework of percolation (see
noticing that a finite cluster consists of a local cluster of
for example the books [69, 291]). In the case of regular
n sites and with m shortcuts leading to other clusters
lattices and bond percolation with a probability p that
a bond is present, we observe a percolation transition
∞ ∞
at a finite, non-universal value p c which depends on the H(z)= (cid:88) P 0(n)zn (cid:88) P(m|n)[H(z)]m (272)
lattice. Below the threshold, we observe finite clusters
n=0 m=0
70
(thisequationcanbeunderstoodifwenotethatthepref- casewiththehelpofhigh-orderseriesexpansion[249]and
actor of zl is the probability to belong to a finite cluster Ozana [254] discussed finite-size scaling for this problem
of size l). For large N, we then obtain by noting that we have two length scales in the problem:
the length ξ ∼ 1/p1/d which gives the typical size
SW
H(z)=H (ze2φk(H(z)−1)) (273) of clusters connected by the shortcuts and the length
0
ξ which is the usual cluster size for the percolation on
where the underlying lattice. The main result is that short-
cuts indeed lead to a mean-field behavior and the larger
(1−q)2
H (z)=1−p+pz (274) their density, the smaller the percolation threshold (see
0 (1−qz)2
Fig. 77).
From this equation (273), we can then estimate various
quantities such as the average cluster size
p(1+q)
(cid:104)s(cid:105)=H(cid:48)(1)= (275)
1−q−2kφp(1+q)
Atthepercolationthresholdp=p ,thissizedivergesand
c
we thus obtain an implicit equation for the threshold
(1−p )k
φ= c (276)
2kp (2−(1−p )k)
c c
Thenumericalsolutionforthepercolationthresholdver-
sus the density of shortcuts φ is shown in Fig. 76. Close
FIG. 77 Percolation threshold for a two-dimensional Watts-
Strogatz network with a fraction φ of shortcuts (the lines
are the analytical calculations and the circles represent the
numericalsimulation). Theinsetisthezoominloglogonthe
smallφregion(thenumericalsimulationiscomparedwiththe
analytical calculation for the quantity 1/2−p ). From [249].
c
In[310]theauthorsstudythepercolationonamodelof
lattice-based scale-free network where each node is con-
nected to all the neighbors in a radius R distributed
according to a law P(R) ∼ R−β which implies that
P(k) ∼ k−γ with β = d(γ −1)+1. The main result
is that the percolation threshold is non-zero for γ >2 in
contrast with scale-free networks with γ < 3 which dis-
FIG.76 Numericalsolutionforthepercolationthresholdfor play the behavior (see for example [32]) p c(N) → 0. In
N =106 for site and bond percolation (shown left and right, fact, for γ > 2, the radius distribution is behaving with
respectively). Circlesrepresentthecasek=1,squaresk=2, anexponentβ >d+1andmostofthelinksareshort. In
and triangles k=5. From [236]. otherwords,thebehaviorshouldbetheoneofanalmost
regular lattice (with a rescaled lattice spacing of order
to p we also obtain (cid:104)s(cid:105) ∼ (p − p)1/σ with σ = 1, (cid:104)R(cid:105) < ∞) leading thus to a finite percolation threshold.
c c
P(n)∼n−τe−n/n∗ with τ =3/2. We note here that it would be interesting to extend to
These values τ = 3/2 and σ = 1 correspond actu- the length for example the study made in [237] where
ally to the mean-field values of percolation. This result the probability that an edge depends on the degree of
meansthattheshortcutsnotonlymodifythepercolation its endpoints, allowing an interpolation between random
threshold(whichisexpectedsincep isnotuniversal)but failures and targeted attacks.
c
alsotheuniversalityclass: theWSmodelresemblesmore In [20], Auto et al. studied percolation on Apollonian
to a random graph in infinite dimension. This result is networks (see [178] and section IV.A.4) using real-space
actually consistent with what happens for example for renormalization. For this two-dimensional spatial, scale-
the Ising model, which is mean-field like as long as the free, and planar network, the percolation threshold goes
shortcut density is non-zero (see section V.A). to zero in the thermodynamic limit in agreement with
Thisone-dimensionalmodelwasextendedtothed=2 general results for scale-free networks with γ < 3. The
71
mass of the percolating cluster however behaves as M ∼ straints, power grids have an exponentially distributed
e−λ/p (whereλisaconstant), aresultreminiscentofthe degree (see section III.B.2) and in this case we can com-
marginal case γ =3. pute the effect of different removal strategies. In partic-
ular, if we remove nodes at random, the critical fraction
f is given by [88]
c
2. Cascade of failures in infrastructures
1
f =1− (278)
A small local failure will lead to a major breakdown c κ−1
when it can propagate and reinforce itself. A simple il-
lustration of this phenomenon is displayed in the exam- where κ = (cid:104)k2(cid:105) 0/(cid:104)k(cid:105) 0 (where the subscript 0 indicates
ple of the random fuse network introduced in 1985 by thatwecomputethecorrespondingquantitiesbeforeany
deArcangelis, RednerandHerrmann[106]. Therandom noderemoval). Anotherstrategyconsistinattackingthe
fuse network is an electrical metaphor of material break-
down and consists of a lattice where the bonds are fuses
with threshold i distributed according to a given law
c
P(i ). If the current going through a fuse is larger than
c
its threshold, the fuse breaks and its conductance goes
to zero. The randomness of the thresholds models the
heterogeneity of a material and the main question here
is what happens if a macroscopic current I is injected
in this system. If we assume that a given bond fails,
the current will be redistributed according to Kirchoff’s
lawsontheneighborsofthefailedfuse. Forexample,for
aninfinitetwo-dimensionalsquarelattice,thecurrenton
the nearest neighbors of the failed bond is multiplied by
ζ = 4/π (see for example [86]). If the distribution P(i )
c
has a finite support [i ,i ], we can then produce the
m M FIG. 78 Effect of random removal of nodes (white circles)
following argument. In the worst case, the failed bond
andtargetedattacks(blackcircles)ontherelativesizeofthe
had the smallest threshold possible i . The current on
m largest component of the EU power grid. In the inset, the
the neighbors is then ζi and the failure will certainly
m effect of random removal and targeted attacks are shown for
propagate if Italy(dashedlines)andFrance(continuousline). From[288].
ζi >i (277)
m M most connected nodes in which case we can also com-
pute a critical fraction using the argument developed
This result implies that if the disorder is weak (ie. the
in [88] (see Fig. (78) where the two strategies are illus-
difference δ = i − i is small), the failure will very
M m trated in the case of the European power grid). One
likely propagate across the system and create a macro-
obtains for a network with a degree distribution of the
scopic avalanche (which in material science is known as
form P(k) ∼ exp(−k/γ), the following condition for the
a ‘brittle’ behavior). In the opposite case of large δ, we
critical fraction f
willobservetheformationofmicrocrackswhichwillgrow c
and eventually coalesce when the applied current I is in- 1
creased (‘ductile’ behavior). This simple example shows 1+f c(lnf c−1)=
2γ−1
(279)
that the flow redistribution process after a failure is a
crucial element, and combined with the heterogeneity of IntheFig.79(a),weseethatthecriticalfractionofnode
the system can lead to a large variety of behavior. A removalisobviouslysmallerinthetargetedattackstrat-
general model of failure and current redistribution was egy. In the Fig. 79(b), the authors of [288] compare the
for example discussed in [238] but we will focus in this theoretical mean-field value of f with actual simulation
c
chapter on cases where space plays a dominant role. results. The agreement is relatively good but there are
Various studies examined the vulnerability of infras- some deviations for small values of γ: the simulated val-
tructures such as power grids [9, 192, 288], Internet, or uesoff seemtoberelativelyconstant(oforder0.2±0.1)
c
transportationnetworks[105,210,321]andmostofthese while the mean-field value goes to zero for γ →1 (which
studiesarenotconcernedwithspatialaspectsbutrather corresponds roughly to the one-dimensional case).
focused on how to measure the damage and the effect of
various attack strategies. In particular, nodes with large
betweennesscentralityseemtobetheweakpointsforall 3. Failure of interdependent networks
these networks, leading to the idea that global proper-
tiesofthenetworkareneededinordertounderstandthe Space leads naturally to an increased level of inter-
stability of these systems. connection between critical infrastructure networks. Re-
As many spatial networks with strong physical con- centeventssuchasthe2003blackouthavereinforcedthe
72
FIG.80 Schematicrepresentationoftwointerdependentnet-
works. Nodes in network B (communications network) are
dependent on nodes in network A (power grid) for power;
nodes in network A are dependent on network B for control
information. From [67].
are interdependent, hubs can be dependent on small de-
gree nodes which leads to an increased vulnerability of
thesystem. Wenoteherethatthisproblemisnotequiv-
alenttoonedynamicsontwoconnectednetworks, which
obviouslyreducestotheusualcaseofonesinglenetwork.
F. Space and the spread of disease
The importance of space and mobility networks ap-
pearsveryclearlyinthestudyofepidemicspread. Infec-
tious diseases indeed spread because people interact and
FIG. 79 (a) Comparison of the critical fraction needed to
disrupt an exponential network with distribution P(k) ∼ travel and the modeling of disease spread thus requires -
exp(−k/γ). (b) Estimated values for attacks on 33 different ideally - the knowledge of the origin-destination matrix
European power grids (circles) and the mean-field prediction and of the social network.
of Eq. (279) (continuous line). From [288]. We first recall here the main results for a prototype of
disease spreading (the SIR model) on lattices and small-
world networks. In particular, we discuss the effect of
shortcuts on the spreading process. We then discuss the
need for understanding the vulnerabilities of this spa-
metapopulationmodelwhichentersthedescriptionofthe
tially coupled network. In particular, in [67] the authors
disease spread among several subpopulations connected
modeled the effect of the coupling between the electri-
by a network. Finally, we end this chapter by describing
cal network and the Internet. They considered that the
recent studies of a malware propagation among WIFI
electricalblackoutinItalyinSeptember2003causedthe
routers and the virus spread using Bluetooth and MMS.
shutdown of power stations which led to the failure of
Internet nodes, and which in turn caused the breakdown
of other power stations. The model proposed in [67] is
1. SIR on lattices and small-world networks
made of two interconnected networks (see Fig. 80). The
two interconnected networks have their own dynamics
In theoretical epidemiology, it is customary to divide
and can therefore not be considered as forming one sin-
thepopulationintocompartments,suchasinfectious(I),
gle large network. The ability of a node in A to function
susceptible (S), or removed individuals (R), and where
willdependonitsB-node(andvice-versa)whichleadsto
thenumberofcompartmentsdependsonthespecificna-
the following process proposed in [67]: all B-nodes con-
ture of the disease [17]. This description assumes that
nected to A-nodes which do not belong the giant cluster
we neglect fluctuations among individuals in the same
in A have to be disrupted and vice-versa. This dynam-
state. Two main models have been studied in the litera-
icsleadstosurprisingeffectssuchtheloweringofcritical
ture which are:
thresholds, and the appearance of an abrupt first-order
transition with the size of the giant component going • The SIS model. In this case, a susceptible individ-
abruptly to zero at the transition point. In particular, ualincontactwithinfectedindividualscanbecome
fortwoconnectedscale-freenetworks,theinterdependent himself infected and will heal after a certain time
dynamics leads to an additional fragility: while the de- andcomebacktoasusceptiblestate,meaningthat
gree heterogeneity is an asset against failure with many he can catch again the disease. This could for ex-
small degree nodes and a few hubs, when two networks ample describe the common cold which does not
73
confer long lasting immunity and for which indi-
viduals become susceptible again after infection.
• The SIR model. The difference here is that an in-
fected individual becomes immunized (or has re-
covered) after a certain time immunized and can-
not catch the disease again. This is for example
the case for infantile disease that we cannot catch
a second time (in the vast majority of cases).
In the homogeneous mixing approximation, the equa-
tions governing the evolution of the number of suscepti-
bles, infected, and recovered are in the SIR case

∂ S =−λS I
 t N
∂ I =+λS I −µI (280)
t N
∂
R =+µI
t FIG.81 SpreadoftheBlackDeathduringthe14thcentury.
The epidemic front spreads in Europe with a velocity of the
alongwiththeconditionS+I+R=N andwhereλisthe
order of 200400 miles per year. From [94].
probabilityperunittimetocatchthediseaseandµisthe
recovery rate (ie. 1/µ is the typical recovery time). The
basic reproductive rate [17] is here given by R = λ/µ
0
and represents the average number of secondary infec- In the non-spatial version the evolution of the densities
tionswhenoneinfectedindividualisintroducedinasus- s = S/N, i = I/N and r = R/N is described by the set
ceptiblepopulation. Wethushaveanepidemicthreshold of equations (see for example [17, 32])
λ =µ below which the disease is not contagious enough
c
tospreadinthepopulationandabovewhichanextensive (cid:40) ∂s =−λsi
fraction of the population gets infected. ∂t (281)
∂i =+λsi−µi
In the homogeneous approximation, any pair of indi- ∂t
vidual can interact which is not realistic in many cases
alongwiththeconditionthatthesumofthethreedensi-
(but which usually allows for an analytical approach).
tiesisones+i+r =1. Intheseequations,thenumberof
Wehavethentointroducethecontactnetworkforwhich
individualsisabsorbedinthedefinitionofthequantityλ.
the nodes are the individuals and the presence of a link
In the spatial version, the quantities s and i now depend
betweeniandj denotesthepossibilitythattheviruscan
on space and in the simplest version it is assumed that
spread from i to j (or from j to i). When we introduce
simple diffusion is the cause of their dispersion and that
a contact network, the important question which imme-
they have the same diffusion constant. The equations
diately arises is the one of the epidemic threshold and
governing their evolution then become
the effect of the network structure on its value. In this
section,wewillexaminetwocases. Wewillfirstexamine (cid:40)
∂s =−λsi+D∇2s
the SIR model in the case of a lattice and we then pro- ∂t (282)
ceed to the Watts-Strogatz case where long-range links
∂i =+λsi−µi+D∇2i
∂t
are added to a lattice.
When D (cid:54)= 0 and λ = µ = 0, the infection front grows
√
as t while the combination of D (cid:54)= 0 and λ (cid:54)= 0 leads
a. SIR model in space. In the pre-industrial times, dis- in fact to a finite velocity. A simple way to see this is
ease spread was mainly a spatial diffusion phenomenon. given by the following argument for the one-dimensional
For instance, during the spread of the so-called Black case[241]. Usingdimensionalarguments, wewillusethe
Death,whichoccurredinthe14th century(seeforexam- following rescaling
ple [250]), only few travelling means were available and
(cid:114)
typical trips were limited to relatively short distances on i→ I , s→ S , x→ λS 0x, t→λS t (283)
thetimescaleofoneday. Historicalstudiesconfirmthat S S D 0
0 0
the propagation (see Fig. 81) indeed followed a simple
scheme,withaspatio-temporalspreadmainlydominated andwhereR 0 =λS 0/µisthebasicreproductiverateand
by spatial diffusion. must be larger than one in order to observe an outbreak
The simplest way to describe the spatio-temporal evo- [17](thequantityS 0istheinitialnumberofsusceptibles).
lution of a disease can be found for example in the book We then obtain
[241]whodescribedaspatialSIRmodelwhereS(x,t)de- (cid:40)
∂s =−si+ ∂2s
notes the susceptible individuals and I(x,t) the infected ∂t ∂x2 (284)
and infectious individuals at time t and at location x. ∂i =+si− 1 i+ ∂2i
∂t R0 ∂x2
74
WelooknowforatravelingwavesolutionofEq.(284)of b. SIR model in small-worlds. An important observation
the form which was made by Grassberger [145] is that the SIR
model on a graph can be mapped to the correspond-
(cid:40)
i(x,t) =i(x−vt) ing bond percolation problem. This mapping is however
(285)
s(x,t) =s(x−vt) valid only for at least a very peaked distribution of in-
fection time [189] (the main reason for the failure of the
where v is the wavespeed which needs to be determined. mappinginthecaseofrandominfectiontimesistheexis-
Inserting this form in the system Eq. (284) we obtain tenceofcorrelationsintroducedbetweenneighborsofthe
samesite). Asin[145],theauthorsof[311,312]consider
(cid:40)
i(cid:48)(cid:48)+vi(cid:48)+i(S− 1 ) =0 a SIR model where nodes stay infectious during a time
R0 (286) τ and that the transmission rate between two connected
s(cid:48)(cid:48)+vs(cid:48)−is =0
nodes is a random variable distributed according to the
distributionP(λ). Foragivenvalueofλ,theprobability
where the prime denotes the derivation with respect to
1−p not to transmit the disease is given by
the variable z =x−vt. We look for a solution such that
i(−∞) = i(∞) = 0 and 0 ≤ s(−∞) < s(∞) = 1. Near 1−p=(1−λδt)τ/δt (291)
the wave front, s≈1 and i≈0 and we obtain
which in the continuous time limit and averaged over all
1
i(cid:48)(cid:48)+vi(cid:48)+i(1− )≈0 (287) values of λ gives
R
0
(cid:90)
which can be solved and leads to p(τ)=1− dλP(λ)e−λτ (292)
(cid:20) (cid:114) (cid:21)
1
i(z)∝exp (−v± v2−4(1− ))z/2 (288) This quantity p gives the fraction of bonds completed in
R
0 a given epidemic and we thus obtain a mapping between
the SIR model and a bond percolation problem. If p
Thissolutioncannotoscillatearoundi=0whichimplies
is larger than the percolation threshold on the underly-
that the wavespeed v and R must satisfy the conditions
0
ing lattice, there is a giant cluster which means that an
R >1 and
0
extensive number of nodes were infected. For a peaked
1 distribution of λ the epidemic threshold is given by
v ≥2(1− )1/2 (289)
R
0
λ =−τln(1−p ) (293)
c c
Formostinitialconditions,thetravellingwavecomputed
in the full non-linear system will evolve at the minimal and indicates the general trend that if p c is smaller then
velocity and we eventually obtain the epidemic wave ve- λ c is smaller too. On a square lattice, for p > p c = 1/2
locity we obtain results such as the one shown in Fig. 82(a)
whereweseesomelargeregionsunaffectedbythedisease.
(cid:114)
1 The authors of [311, 312] studied the SIR model on a
V =2(λS D)1/2 1− (290)
0 R two-dimensional Watts-Strogatz model with a fraction
0
φ of shortcuts connecting randomly chosen nodes. The
We can apply this simple model to the historical case resultisshownintheFig.82banddisplaysevidencethat
of the Black Death. Following [241], the number of in- even a small fraction of long-range links is enough to
dividuals in Europe at that time is ≈ 85 millions which ‘homogenize’ the system and to break down the large
gives a density S ≈ 20/km2. The quantities λ and µ unaffected regions. In addition, as shown in [249] the
0
are more difficult to determine as the plague transmits percolationthresholddecreaseswithφ(seeFig.77)which
with fleas jumping from rats to humans. In [250] these impliesthattheepidemicthresholdisalsosmallerdueto
parameters are estimated to be µ≈15/year and λ≈1.0 the shortcuts which facilitate the spread of the disease.
km2/year. ThebasicreproductiverateisthenR ≈1.33
0
whichisnotverylarge. Themaindifficultyhereisthees-
timate of the diffusion coefficient and if we assume that
The same mapping between the SIR model and bond
news spread at a velocity of around 160 kms per year,
percolation implies that for the scale-free network with
we obtain D ≈ 104 kms2/year. Putting all the numbers
exponentγ andconstructedonalattice(suchasin[310])
together we then find a velocity of the order v ≈ 700
the epidemic threshold is non-zero for γ > 2, while for
kms/yearwhichislargerthanhistoricalestimatesputin
a non-spatial scale-free network, we expect p = 0 (in
therange[300,600]kms/year,butgiventheuncertainties c
the limit of infinite networks, see for example the book
on the parameter (especially for D), the spatial diffusion
[255]). Inthisspatiallattice,itthusseemsthattheaddi-
approximation is not unreasonable.
tion of shortcuts and the existence of hubs is not enough
to counterbalance the effect of the short links and the
underlying spatial structure.
75
is a clear spatial component with the disease spreading
inthesouth-westAsiabutalsowithlong-rangejumpsto
Europe and the US. This clearly shows that pure spatial
diffusionisnotagoodmodelanymoreandthattheglobal
aspect of transportation networks needs to be included
in the modeling. At a smaller scale, it has also been
observed that epizooties such as the foot-and-mouth dis-
ease outbreak in 2001 in Great Britain’s livestock didn’t
follow a purely spatial pattern [188], but instead, the
epidemic showed local stochastic spread and rare long-
distance jumps.
An approach to the problem is provided by metapop-
ulation models which describe the spread of an infec-
tious disease at a scale where a transportation network
dominates. These models describe spatially structured
populations such as cities or urban areas which inter-
act through a given transportation network and have
beenthesubjectofmanystudies(werefertheinterested
reader to [32] and references therein). In the simplest
version of the metapopulation model, the nodes of the
network are the cities (or urban areas) and these cities
are connected through a network defined by a weighted
adjacency matrix p . The element p represents the
ij ij
probability per unit time that an individual chosen at
random in city i will travel to city j. In the case where
we assume that any individual of a city has the same
FIG.82 Snapshotofthefinalclusterofrecoverednodes(gray probabilitytotravel(inotherwordsifweneglectanyso-
nodes) after the epidemics has died out on (a) a lattice with cial structure), the p can then be estimated as w /N
ij ij i
periodic boundary conditions, and (b) on a two-dimensional wherew istheflowoftravelersbetweeniandj andN
ij i
Watts-Strogatznetworkwithafractionofshortcutsφ=0.01. is the population of city i. The evolution of the number
From [311].
I (t) of infected individuals in the city i at time t is then
i
given by an equation of the form
2. From Euclidian space to networks ∂ tI i(t)=K(S i,I i,R i,...)+Ω i({I}) (294)
where K represents the local term and corresponds to
In modern times, the simple picture of pure spatial
thespreadofthediseaseduetointra-citycontamination.
diffusion, with the possible addition of few shortcuts,
The travel term Ω depends on the mobility network and
does however not hold anymore. A striking example can
in the simple case of uniform travel probability, can be
be seen in the SARS outbreak in 2003. In Fig. 83 we
written as (in the limit of large I )
show the spatio-temporal evolution of this disease which l
started in China. We can see on this figure that there
(cid:88)
Ω = p I −p I (295)
i ji j ij i
j
If the probability is constant, Ω is essentially the Lapla-
cianontheunderlyingnetworkandifthemobilitygraph
isalattice,werecovertheusualLaplaciandiffusionterm.
From a theoretical perspective it would be interesting to
understand precisely the crossovers when we have differ-
ent scales and networks interacting with each other.
Theoreticalstudiesonthemetapopulationmodelsuch
as the existence of a pandemic threshold were done in
[41,89,91,95]. Inparticular,ifweassumethatthetravel
probability is constant p = p, the pandemic threshold
ij
FIG.83 GlobalevolutionoftheSARSdiseasewhichstarted has an expression of the form
in China in 2002. The color code corresponds to time and
goes from the Hong Kong outbreak in November 2002 to the (cid:104)k2(cid:105)
endofthediseasespreadinMarch2003. CourtesyV.Colizza. R ∗ ∝(R 0−1)p (cid:104)k(cid:105) (296)
76
The disease will then spread all over the world if R >1
∗
which implies that R > 1 (ie. the disease spreads in
0
each subpopulation) and that the product p(cid:104)k2(cid:105) is large
enough. For scale-free networks (such as for the world-
wide airline network), the quantity (cid:104)k2(cid:105) is large which
suggests that reducing travel (ie. decreasing p) is not ef-
ficient. The fact that reducing travel is not an efficient
strategies was also confirmed in theoretical and numeri-
cal studies[41, 89, 92,95]. Other studieson applications
of metapopulation models to the SARS or Influenza can
be found in [25, 92, 93].
More recently, in [25], small-scale commuting flows
were added to the large-scale airline network. This is
an interesting problem since we have now the superim-
positionofnetworksatdifferentscales. IntheFig.84,we
FIG. 85 (a) Construction of the WIFI network as a random
geometric graph (see section IV.A.1). (b) Giant component
oftheWIFInetworkinChicagofordifferentvaluesR . (c)
int
Degree distribution for different values of R . From [164].
int
value of the router’s range R . In practice, the value of
int
R fluctuates from 10 to 100 meters depending on the
int
environment and the specific router type. In this study,
this value R is assumed to be the same for all routers
int
(butactuallythestudyofgeometricrandomgraphswith
random R could be of interest). An example of such
int
geometric network is shown in Fig. 85 for the Chicago
FIG.84 Comparisonofprevalenceprofileswithoutandwith
area with R =45 meters.
commuting flows. (a-b-c) Prevalence profiles for three conti- int
nental US regions. (d-e) Prevalence profiles for cities in New Hu et al. then use the compartmental approach of
England. From [25]. standard epidemiology in order to describe the spread of
a computer virus. The usual scheme must however be
show the different prevalence (defined as the fraction of enlarged in order to take into account the heterogeneity
infected individuals in the population) profiles obtained observed in the security levels of WIFI routers. For de-
with and without commuting flows. At a regional level, tailsoftheepidemiologicalmodel,werefertheinterested
the prevalence is increased when commuting flows are reader to the paper [164]. Once this epidemiological de-
added in the model but the more spectacular effect is at scription is set up, the authors studied the spread of the
alocallevel: theinclusionofshort-rangemobilitydoesn’t virus in various settings and on the giant component.
changethemagnitudeofprevalencesbutlargelyincreases An example of the spread of the virus is shown for the
the synchrony between outbreaks in neighboring cities Chicago area in Fig. 86. This figure displays a clear spa-
[25]. tialdiffusionofthediseasewhichtakesplaceonthegiant
componentoftheWIFInetwork. Thetimescalesareac-
tuallyveryimportantinthiscaseandHuetal. estimated
3. WIFI and Bluetooth epidemiology thatintheChicagocase,themalwarerapidlypropagates
inafewhoursandinfectsabout40%twoweeksafterthe
a. WIFI epidemiology. In densely populated areas, the beginning of the infection (and about 10% to 55% for
rangeoftheWIFIroutersissuchthatthecorresponding most areas considered in this study).
geometric graph can percolate through the whole urban Thefractionofencryptedroutersandgeometricalcon-
area (see Fig. 85). This fact could be used to spread a straints of the urban area may have large consequences
computer virus or a malware that could have large-scale on the spread of the malware. In particular, areas with
consequences. An epidemiological model was developed small bottlenecks may be very sensitive to the local den-
in [164] in order to study various scenarios and to assess sityofencryptedrouters. Thisstudyallowsforthefuture
the vulnerability of these networks. Using a database to have an estimate of the immunization threshold in or-
containingthegeographiclocationofthewirelessrouters, der to stop the spread of a malware.
Hu et al. [164] focused on seven urban areas in the US.
From the set of vertices (which are here the routers),
the geometric network can be constructed for a given
77
spatial,non-planarnetworks. Thebetweennesscentrality
displays strong fluctuations which can be related to the
interplay of space and degree. These different effects are
by now relatively well understood and as shown in the
sectionIV,thereisnowawealthofvariousmodelswhich
incorporate space at different levels. Finally, in section
V we discussed processes on spatial networks for various
processes such as the random walk, diseases spread etc.
Despite these various advances, there are still many
openproblemswhichcouldrepresentinterestingresearch
directions both at the theoretical and the applied levels.
We give here a non-exhaustive, subjective list of such
open problems which seems particularly interesting.
• Scale and description. In problems such as dis-
ease spread, the description depends strongly on
the scale of interest. At a small spatial scale (but
largeenoughinordertoallowfortheuseofcontin-
uous limits), we can use partial differential equa-
FIG.86 SpatialspreadofaSIRtypediseaseintheChicago
tions. Incontrast, atalargerscale, typicallyofthe
area (results obtained for R =45m). From [164].
int order given by a typical link of the relevant trans-
portation network, the system is better described
by metapopulation models. Given the interest of
b. Mobile phone disease. In [308], Wang et al. study the
interdependent scales and networks, an interesting
spreading patterns of a mobile phone virus. A mobile
question is how we could integrate a ‘mixed’ de-
phone virus can spread through two very different mech-
scription able to interpolate between a continuous
anisms. The first mechanism is through Bluetooth con-
partial differential equation to a discrete network,
nections provided that the infected phone and the sus-
metapopulation-like description. Another way to
ceptible one are separated by a short distance (typically
look at this question is too look for a continuous,
from 10 to 30 meters). The second mechanism, a MMS
pde-like, description of the spread over a network
virus can send a copy of itself to all the numbers found
at a large scale.
in the infected’s phone contact book. We thus have a
short range, spatial infection pattern superimposed with • Interdependent networks. Recent studies showed
long-range infections. However, a cell phone virus can the importance of connected networks and in par-
infect only phones with the right operating system. The ticular that coupled dynamics could lead to new
marketsharemofanOSisthenanimportantparameter and surprising results. In particular, we saw that
inthestudyofmobilephonevirusesspread. Theauthors networksarecoupledviaspaceandthiscanleadto
of [308] used a database of a mobile phone provider and cascadeoffailuresmoreimportantthanwhatcould
simulated the spread of disease using a SI type compart- be expected. However, a number of questions re-
ment model and studied the effect of various values of mained unsolved at this point. For example what
m. They found the existence of a threshold value (of or- aretheconditionsforacouplingtoberelevantand
der m c ≈ 10%) above which there is a giant component to affect the single-network behavior ? In particu-
of phones using the same OS, allowing a MMS virus to lar, in the development of failures, it would be in-
spread (added to the fact that even for m>m c, the dy- teresting to understand the space-time properties
namicsstilldependsonmandthelargerthisparameter, of blackouts.
the faster the dynamics). At the time of this study, the
share of the largest OS was about 3% and could explain • Optimal spatial networks.
why we didn’t see yet a major mobile virus outbreak. Optimal networks are very important as we saw in
this review (see section IV.E). In particular, there
are many different directions such as understand-
VI. SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK ingthehublocationprobleminpresenceofconges-
tion, and more generally we believe that statisti-
In this article we review the most important effects of calphysicscouldbringinterestinginsightsonthese
spaceonthestructureofnetworks. Inparticular,theex- problems usually tackled by mathematicians and
istenceofacostassociatedtothelengthofedgesleadsto engineers expert in optimization. Also, as recent
many important consequences such as a large clustering studies suggested it, evolution through resilience
andaflatassortativity. Thedegreedistributionisusually and noise shaped loopy networks and it would be
peakedduetotheexistenceofstrongphysicalconstraints interestingtounderstandquantitativelytheforma-
although broad degree distributions can be observed for tion and the statistics of these loops.
79
can: Improvinggeographicalpredictionwithsocialand retical and quantitative geography. FGSE,Universityof
spatial proximity. In Proceedings of the 19th interna- Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2009.
tional conference on World Wide Web, Raleigh, North [45] M. Bayati, C. Borgs, A. Braunstein, J. Chayes,
Carolina, USA, pages 61 – 70. ACM, New York, NY, A.Ramezanpour,andR.Zecchina. Statisticalmechan-
USA, 2010. ics of steiner trees. Phys. Rev. Lett., 101:037208, 2010.
[22] G.Bagler. Analysisoftheairportnetworkofindiaasa [46] A. Bazzani, B. Giorgini, S. Rambaldi, R. Gallotti, and
complexweightednetwork. PhysicaA,387:2972–2980, L. Giovannini. Statistical laws in urban mobility from
2008. microscopicgpsdatainareaofflorence. J.Stat. Mech.,
[23] M. Baharona and L.M. Pecora. Synchronization in 2010:P05001, 2010.
small-worldsystems. Phys. Rev. Lett.,89:054101,2002. [47] A.BejanandG.A.Ledezma. Streetstreenetworksand
[24] I.Balberg. Universalpercolation-thresholdlimitsinthe urbangrowth: optimalgeometryforquickestaccessbe-
continuum. Phys. Rev. B, 31:4053, 1985. tween a finite-size volume and one point. Physica A,
[25] D.Balcan,V.Colizza,B.Goncalves,H.Hu,J.R.Ram- 255:211 – 217, 1998.
asco, and A. Vespignani. Mutiscale mobility networks [48] J. Berg and M. Lassig. Correlated random networks.
andthelargespreadingofinfectiousdiseases.Proc.Natl Phys. Rev. Lett., 89:228701, 2002.
Acad. Sci. (USA), 106:21484, 2009. [49] J.H. Bergstrand. The gravity equation in international
[26] J.R. Banavar, A. Maritan, and A. Rinaldo. Size and trade: some microeconomic foundations and empirical
form in efficient transportation networks. Nature, 399: evidence. Thereviewofeconomicsandstatistics,67:474
130, 1999. – 481, 1985.
[27] A.-L. Baraba´si and R. Albert. Emergence of scaling in [50] G. Bianconi and M. Marsili. Loops of any size and
random networks. Science, 286:509 – 511, 1999. hamilton cycles in random scale-free networks. J. Stat.
[28] A. Barrat and M. Weigt. On the properties of small- Mech., 2005:P06005, 2005.
world network models. Eur. Phys. J. B, 13:547, 2000. [51] G.Bianconi,P.Pin,andM.Marsili. Assessingtherele-
[29] A. Barrat, M. Barth´elemy, R. Pastor-Satorras, and vanceofnodefeaturesfornetworkstructure. Proc.Natl
A. Vespignani. The architecture of complex weighted Acad. Sci. (USA), 106:11433, 2009.
networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 101:3747–3752, 2004. [52] J.W.BillheimerandP.Gray. Networkdesignwithfixed
[30] A.Barrat,M.Barth´elemy,andA.Vespignani.Weighted and variable cost elements. Transportation Science, 7:
evolving networks: coupling topology and weights dy- 49 – 74, 1973.
namics. Phys. Rev. Lett., 92:228701, 2004. [53] V.D. Blondel, J.-L. Guillaume, R. Lambiotte, and
[31] A. Barrat, M. Barth´elemy, and A. Vespignani. The ef- E.Lefebvre. Fastunfoldingofcommunitiesinlargenet-
fectsofspatialconstraintsontheevolutionofweighted works. J. Stat. Mech., 2008:P10008, 2008.
complex networks. J. Stat. Mech., page P05003, 2005. [54] S. Boccaletti, V. Latora, Y. Moreno, M. Chavez, and
[32] A.Barrat,M.Barth´elemy,andA.Vespignani. Dynam- D.-U. Hwa ng. Complex networks: Structure and dy-
ical processes in complex networks. Cambridge Univer- namics. Physics Reports, 424:175 – 308, 2006.
sity Press, Cambridge, UK, 2008. [55] M. Bogun˜a´ and R. Pastor-Satorras. Class of correlated
[33] M.Barth´elemy. Crossoverfromspatialtoscale-freenet- random networks with hidden variables. Phys. Rev. E,
works. Europhys. lett., 63:915 – 921, 2003. 68:036112, 2003.
[34] M. Barth´elemy. Comment on: ’universal behavior of [56] M. Bogun˜a´, R. Pastor-Satorras, A. Diaz-Guilera, and
load distribution in scale-free networks’. Phys. Rev. A. Arenas. Model of social networks based on social
Lett., 91:189803, 2003. distance attachment. Phys. Rev. E, 70:056122, 2004.
[35] M.Barth´elemy.Betweennesscentralityinlargecomplex [57] M.Bogun˜a´,D.Krioukov,andkcClaffy. Navigabilityof
networks. Eur. Phys. J. B, 38:163, 2004. complex networks. Nature Physics, 5:74 – 80, 2009.
[36] M. Barth´elemy and L. A. N. Amaral. Small-world net- [58] M.Bogun˜a´,FragkiskosPapadopoulos,andD.Krioukov.
works: Evidence for a crossover. Phys. Rev. Lett., 82: Sustaining the internet with hyperbolic mapping. Na-
3180, 1999. ture Communications, 1, 2010.
[37] M. Barth´elemy and L. A. N. Amaral. Erratum: Small- [59] D.BoulatovandV.Kazakov. Theisingmodelonaran-
world networks: Evidence for a crossover. Phys. Rev. domplanarlattice: thestructureofthephasetransition
Lett., 82:5180, 1999. andtheexactcriticalexponents. Phys.Lett.B,187:379
[38] M. Barth´elemy and A. Flammini. Optimal traffic net- – 384, 1987.
works. J. Stat. Mech., page L07002, 2006. [60] S. Bradde, F. Caccioli, L. Dall’Asta, and G. Bianconi.
[39] M.Barth´elemyandA.Flammini.Modelingurbanstreet Criticalfluctuationsinspatialcomplexnetworks. Phys.
patterns. Phys. Rev. Lett., 100:138702, 2008. Rev. Lett., 104:218701, 2010.
[40] M. Barth´elemy and A. Flammini. Co-evolution of den- [61] M.Brede.Coordinatedanduncoordinatedoptimization
sity and topology in a simple model of city formation. of networks. Phys. Rev. E, 81:066104, 2010.
Networks and Spatial Economics, 9:401 – 425, 2009. [62] M.Brede.Optimalsynchronizationinspace.Phys.Rev.
[41] M.Barth´elemy,C.Godr`eche,andJ.-M.Luck. Fluctua- E, 81:025202(R), 2010.
tion effects in metapopulation models: percolation and [63] M.Brede. Smallworldsinspace: synchronization,spa-
pandemic threshold. J. Theor. Biol., 2010. tial and relational modularity. Europhysics Letters, 90:
[42] M. Batty. Cities and Complexity. MIT Press, Cam- 60005, 2010.
bridge, 2005. [64] D.Brockmann,L.Hufnagel,andT.Geisel. Thescaling
[43] M. Batty. Accessibility: in search of a unified theory. laws of human travel. Nature, 439:462 – 465, 2006.
Env. and Plan. B: Planning and Design, 36:191 – 194, [65] D.L.BryanandM.E.O’Kelly. Hub-and-spokenetworks
2009. in air transportation: an analytical review. Journal of
[44] F. Bavaud and C. Mager, editors. Handbook of theo- regional science, 39:275 – 295, 1999.
80
[66] J.Buhl,J.Gautrais,N.Reeves,R.V.Sol´e,S.Valverde, [87] R.CohenandS.Havlin. Complex Networks: Structure,
P. Kuntz, and G. Theraulaz. Topological patterns Robustness and Function. Cambridge University Press,
in street networks of self-organized urban settlements. Cambridge, 2010.
Eur. Phys. J. B, 49:513 – 522, 2006. [88] R. Cohen, K. Erez, D. ben Avraham, and S. Havlin.
[67] S.V.Buldyrev,R.Parshani,G.Paul,H.E.Stanley,and Resilienceoftheinternettorandombreakdowns. Phys.
S. Havlin. Catastrophic cascade of failures in interde- Rev. Lett., 85:4626, 2000.
pendent networks. Nature, 464:1025 – 1028, 2010. [89] V.ColizzaandA.Vespignani.Invasionthresholdinhet-
[68] E. Bullmore and O. Sporns. Complex brain networks: erogeneous metapopulation networks. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
graph theoretical analysis of structural and functional 99:148701, 2007.
systems. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 10:186 – 198, [90] V. Colizza, J.R. Banavar, A. Maritan, and A. Rinaldo.
2009. Networkstructuresfromselectionprinciples.Phys.Rev.
[69] A. Bunde and S. Havlin. Percolation. In A. Bunde Lett., 92:198701, 2004.
andS.Havlin,editors,FractalsandDisorderedSystems, [91] V. Colizza, A. Barrat, M. Barth´elemy, and A. Vespig-
pages 51–95. Springer Verlag, Heidelberg, 1991. nani. Predictionandpredictabilityofglobalepidemics:
[70] G. Caldarelli. Scale-free networks. Oxford University theroleoftheairlinetransportationnetwork.Proc.Natl
Press, Oxford, 2007. Acad. Sci. (USA), 103:2015, 2006.
[71] G. Caldarelli, A. Capocci, P. De Los Rios, and M. A. [92] V. Colizza, A. Barrat, M. Barth´elemy, A.-J. Valleron,
Munoz. Scale-free networks from varying vertex intrin- and A. Vespignani. Modeling the worldwide spread of
sic fitness. Phys. Rev. Lett., 89:258702, 2002. pandemic influenza: Baseline case and containment in-
[72] D.S.Callaway,M.E.J.Newman,S.H.Strogatz,andD.J. terventions. PLoS Medicine, 4:e13, 2007.
Watts.Networkrobustnessandfragility: Percolationon [93] V. Colizza, A. Barrat, M. Barth´elemy, and A. Vespig-
randomgraphs. Phys. Rev. Lett.,85:5468–5471,2000. nani. Predictability and epidemic pathways in global
[73] A.Cardillo,S.Scellato,V.Latora,andS.Porta. Struc- outbreaks of infectious diseases: the sars case study.
tural properties of planar graphs of urban street pat- BMC Medicine, 5:34, 2007.
terns. Phys. Rev. E, 73:066107, 2006. [94] V. Colizza, M. Barth´elemy, A. Barrat, and A. Vespig-
[74] C.C.CartozoandP.DeLosRios.Extendednavigability nani. Epidemic modeling in complex realities. C.R.
ofsmallworldnetworks: exactresultsandnewinsights. Biologies, 330:364 – 374, 2007.
arXiv, page 0901.4710, 2009. [95] V. Colizza, R. Pastor-Satorras, and A. Vespignani.
[75] S. Caschili, A. De Montis, A. Chessa, and G. Deplano. Reaction-diffusion processes and metapopulation mod-
Weighted networks and community detection: plan- els in heterogeneous networks. Nature Physics, 3:276 –
ning productive districts in sardinia. In G. Rabino 282, 2007.
andM.Caglioni,editors,Planning, complexityandnew [96] V. Colizza, M. Barth´elemy, and A. Vespignani. Typol-
ICT, pages 27 – 36. Alinea Editrice s.r.l., 2009. ogy of nodes in weighted directed networks. Unpub-
[76] C. Castellano, S. Fortunato, and V. Loreto. Statistical lished, 2008.
physics of social dynamics. Rev. Mod. Phys., 81:591 – [97] A.Coniglio.Fractalstructureofisingandpottsclusters:
646, 2009. exact results. Phys. Rev. Lett., 62:3054, 1989.
[77] A.K.Chandra,K.B.Hajra,P.K.Das,andP.Sen. Mod- [98] F. Corson. Fluctuations and redundancy in optimal
elingtemporalandspatialfeaturesofcollaborationnet- transportnetworks. Phys. Rev. Lett.,104:048703,2010.
works. Int. J. of Mod. Phys. C, 18:1157 – 1172, 2007. [99] L. Da F. Costa, B.A.N. Travencolo, M.P. Viana, and
[78] Y.F. Chang, L. Sun, and X. Cai. Phase transition of E. Strano. On the efficiency of transportation systems
aone-dimensionalisingmodelwithdistancedependent in large cities. Europhysics Letters, 91:18003, 2010.
connections. Phys. Rev. E, 76:021101, 2007. [100] T.Courtat,C.Gloaguen,andS.Douady. Mathematics
[79] A. Chatterjee and P. Sen. Phase transition on ising andmorphogenesisofthecity: ageometricalapproach.
modelonaeuclideannetwork. Phys.Rev.E,74:036117, Phys. Rev. E, 2010.
2006. [101] P.Crucitti,V.Latora,andM.Marchiori. Atopological
[80] M. Chavez, M. Valencia, V. Latora, and J. Martinerie. analysis of the italian electric power grid. Physica A,
Complexnetworks: newtrendsfortheanalysisofbrain 338:92 – 97, 2004.
connectivity. to appear in Int. J. Bif. Chaos, 2010. [102] P. Crucitti, V. Latora, and S. Porta. Centrality mea-
[81] R.J.ChorleyandP.Haggett,editors. Modelsingeogra- sures in spatial networks of urban streets. Phys. Rev.
phy. Methuen and Co., London, 1967. E, 73:036125, 2006.
[82] G. Chowell, J. M. Hyman, S. Eubank, and C. Castillo- [103] P. Crucitti, V. Latora, and S. Porta. Centrality in net-
Chavez. Scaling laws for the movement of people be- works of urban streets. Chaos, 16:015113, 2006.
tweenlocationsinalargecity. Phys.Rev.E,68:066102, [104] J.DallandM.Christensen. Randomgeometricgraphs.
2003. Phys. Rev. E, 66:016121, 2002.
[83] F.R.K.Chung. Spectralgraphtheory. AMSPress,Prov- [105] L.Dall’Asta,A.Barrat,M.Barth´elemy,andA.Vespig-
idence, RI, 1997. nani.Vulnerabilityofweightednetworks.J.Stat.Mech.,
[84] C. Clark. Urban population densities. J. R. Stat. Soc. page P04006, 2006.
(Series A), 114:490 – 496, 1951. [106] L.deArcangelis,S.Redner,andH.J.Herrmann.Aran-
[85] J.ClarkandD.A.Holton. A first look at graph theory. dom fuse model for breaking processes. J. Phys. Lett.,
World Scientific, 1991. 46:L585, 1985.
[86] J.-P. Clerc, G. Giraud, J.-M. Laugier, and J.-M. Luck. [107] A.deMontis,M.Barth´elemy,A.Chessa,andA.Vespig-
The electrical conductivity of binary disordered sys- nani. Structure of inter-cities traffic: A weighted net-
tems, percolation clusters, fractals and related models. workanalysis.EnvironmentandPlanning,34:905–924,
Adv. Phys., 39:191 – 309, 1990. 2007.
81
[108] A.Denise,M.Vasconcellos,andD.Welsh. Therandom [129] S. Fortunato. Community detection in graphs. Phys.
planar graph. Congr. Numer., 113:61 – 79, 1996. Rep., 486:75 – 174, 2010.
[109] D.LevinsonandK.J.Krizek,editors. Planningforplace [130] S. Fortunato and M. Barth´elemy. Resolution limit in
and plexus: metropolitan land use and transport. Rout- communitydetection.Proc.NatlAcad.Sci.(USA),104:
ledge, New York, NY, 2008. 36 – 41, 2007.
[110] R.DobrinandP.M.Duxbury. Minimumspanningtrees [131] L.C.Freeman. Asetofmeasuresofcentralitybasedon
on random networks. Phys. Rev. Lett., 86:5076 – 5079, betweenness. Sociometry, 40:35 – 41, 1977.
2001. [132] D. Garlaschelli, G. Caldarelli, and L. Pietronero. Uni-
[111] L. Donetti, P.I. Hurtado, and M.A. Munoz. Entangled versal scaling relations in food webs. Nature, 423:165,
networks, synchronization and optimal network topol- 2003.
ogy. Phys. Rev. Lett., 95:188701, 2005. [133] W.L. Garrison. Connectivity of the interstate highway
[112] S.N.DorogovtsevandJ.F.F.Mendes.Exactlysolvable system. Regional Science, 6:121 – 137, 1960.
small-world network. Europhys. Lett., 50:1, 2000. [134] M.T. Gastner and M.E.J. Newman. Optimal design of
[113] S. N. Dorogovtsev and J. F. F. Mendes. Evolution of spatial distribution networks. Phys. Rev. E, 74:016117,
networks. Adv. Phys., 51:1079 – 1187, 2002. 2006.
[114] S. N. Dorogovtsev and J. F. F. Mendes. Evolution [135] M.T. Gastner and M.E.J. Newman. Shape and effi-
of networks: From biological nets to the Internet and ciency in spatial distribution networks. J. Stat. Mech.,
WWW. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2003. page P01015, 2006.
[115] P.G. Doyle and J.L. Snell. Random walks and electric [136] M.T. Gastner and M.E.J. Newman. The spatial struc-
networks. The Mathematical Association of America, ture of networks. Eur. Phys. J. B, 49:247 – 252, 2006.
USA, pages 83 – 149, 1984. [137] S.GerkeandC.McDiarmid. Onthenumberofedgesin
[116] B. Duplantier. Statistical mechanics of polymer net- random planar graphs. Combinatorics, Probability and
works of any topology. J. Stat. Phys., 54:581 – 680, Computing, 13:165, 2004.
1989. [138] K.-I. Goh, B. Kahng, and D. Kim. Universal behavior
[117] A.DvoretzkyandP.Erdos. Someproblemsonrandom of load distribution in scale-free networks. Phys. Rev.
walksinspace. InProceedingsofthe2ndBerkeleySym- Lett., 87:278701, 2001.
posiumonmathematicalstatisticsandprobability,pages [139] K.I. Goh, E. Oh, H. Jeong, B. Kahng, and D. Kim.
353–367.UniversityofCaliforniaPress,Berkeley,Cal- Classification of scale-free networks. Proc. Natl Acad.
ifornia, 1950. Sci. USA, 99:12583, 2002.
[118] N.EagleandS.Pentland. Eigenbbehaviors: Identifying [140] J. Goldenberg and M. Levy. Distance is not dead: So-
structureinroutine. Behavior Ecology Sociobiology,63: cialinteractionandgeographicaldistanceintheinternet
1057 – 1066, 2009. era. arXiv, page 0906.3202, 2009.
[119] E.N.Economou. Green’s functions in quantum physics. [141] M.C.GonzalezandH.J.Herrmann. Scalingoftheprop-
Springer, 2006. agationofepidemicsinasystemofmobileagents.Phys-
[120] V. M. Eguiluz, D.R. Chialvo, G.A. Cecchi, M. Baliki, ica A, 340:741 – 748, 2004.
and A.V. Apkarian. Scale-free brain functional net- [142] M.C. Gonzalez, P.G. Lind, and H.J. Herrmann. Model
works. Phys. Rev. Lett., 94:018102, 2005. of mobile agents for sexual interaction networks. Eur.
[121] A. El-Geneidy and D. Levinson. Place rank: valuing Phys. J. B, 49:371 – 376, 2006.
spatial interactions. Networks and Spatial Economics, [143] M.C.Gonzalez,P.G.Lind,andH.J.Herrmann. System
2010. of mobile agents to model social networks. Phys. Rev.
[122] P. Erdo¨s and A. R´enyi. On random graphs. Publica- Lett., 96:088702, 2006.
tiones Mathematicae, 6:290 – 297, 1959. [144] M.C. Gonzalez, C.A. Hidalgo, and A.-L. Barabasi. Un-
[123] P. Erdo¨s and P. R´enyi. On the evolution of random derstanding individual human mobility patterns. Na-
graphs. Publ. Math. Inst. Hung. Acad. Sci., 5:17–60, ture, 453:779 – 782, 2009.
1960. [145] P. Grassberger. On the critical behavior of the gen-
[124] P.Erdo¨sandP.R´enyi.Onthestrengthofconnectedness eralepidemicprocessanddynamicalpercolation. Math.
of random graphs. Acta. Math. Sci. Hung, 12:261–267, Biosci., 63:157 – 172, 1983.
1961. [146] R.Guimera´andL.A.N.Amaral. Modelingtheworld-
[125] S. Erlander and N.F. Stewart. The gravity model in wide airport network. Eur. Phys. J. B, 38:381 – 385,
transportationanalysis.VSP,Utrecht,TheNetherlands, 2004.
1990. [147] R. Guimera` and L.A.N. Amaral. Cartography of com-
[126] A.Fabrikant,E.Koutsoupias,andC.H.Papadimitriou. plex networks: modules and universal roles. J. Stat.
Heuristically optimized trade-offs: A new paradigm for Mech., 2005:P02001, 2005.
power laws in the Internet. In Proceeding of the 29th [148] R. Guimera`, A. Diaz-Guilera, F. Vega-Redondo,
InternationalColloquiumonAutomata,Languages,and A. Cabrales, and A. Arenas. Optimal network topolo-
Programming(ICALP),volume2380ofLectureNotesin gies for local search with congestion. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
Computer Science, pages 110–122. Springer, 2002. 89:248701, 2002.
[127] R. Farmani, D.A. Savic, and G.A. Walters. Exnet [149] R.Guimera`,S.Mossa,A.Turtschi,andL.A.N.Amaral.
benchmark problem for multi-objective optimization of The worldwide air transportation network: Anomalous
large water systems. In Modelling and control for par- centrality,communitystructure,andcities’globalroles.
ticipatory planning and managing water systems, IFAC Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 102:7794–7799, 2005.
Workshop, Venice, Italy, 2004. [150] P.HaggettandR.J.Chorley. Network analysis in geog-
[128] M. Fiedler. Algebraic connectivity of graphs. Czech. raphy. Edward Arnold, London, 1969.
Math. J., 23:298 – 305, 1973. [151] K.B.HajraandP.Sen.Effectofastaticphasetransition
82
on searching dynamics. J. Stat. Mech., 2007:P06015, plex networks. Phys. Rev. E, 74:026116, 2006.
2007. [172] F.JaschandA.Blumen.Targetproblemonsmall-world
[152] S. Handy and D.A. Niemeier. Measuring accessibility: networks. Phys. Rev. E, 63:041108, 2001.
anexplorationofissuesandalternatives.Env.andPlan. [173] S.JespersenandA.Blumen.Small-worldnetworkswith
A, 29:1175 – 1194, 1997. long-taileddistributions. Phys. Rev. E,62:6270–6274,
[153] C. Hauert and G. Szabo. Game theory and physics. 2000.
American Journal of Physics, 73:405 – 414, 2005. [174] S.Jespersen, I.M.Sokolov, and A.Blumen. Relaxation
[154] Y. Hayashi. A review of recent studies of geographi- properties of small-world networks. Phys. Rev. E, 62:
cal scale-free networks. IPSJ Trans. Special Issue on 4405 – 4408, 2000.
Network Ecology, 47:776 – 785, 2006. [175] B. Jiang. A topological pattern of urban street net-
[155] C.Herrero. Isingmodelinsmall-worldnetworks. Phys. works: universality and peculiarity. Physica A, 384:647
Rev. E, 65:066110, 2002. – 655, 2007.
[156] C.Herrmann,M.Barth´elemy,andP.Provero. Connec- [176] B.JiangandC.Claramunt. Topologicalanalysisofur-
tivitydistributionofspatialnetworks. Phys.Rev.E,68: banstreetnetworks. Env. Plann B,31:151–162,2004.
026128, 2003. [177] J. Jost and M.P. Joy. Evolving networks with distance
[157] C.C. Hilgetag, G.A.P.C. Burns, M.A. O’Neill, J.W. preferences. Phys. Rev. E, 66:036126, 2002.
Scannell, and M.P. Young. Theoretical neuroanatomy: [178] J.S. Andrade Jr., H.J. Herrmann, R.F.S. Andrade, and
relating anatomical and functional connectivity in L.R. da Silva. Apollonian networks. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
graphs and cortical connection matrices. Phil. Trans. 94:018702, 2005.
R. Soc. Lond. B, 355:91, 2000. [179] W.-S.Jung,F.Wang,andH.E.Stanley. Gravitymodel
[158] H.J. Hilhorst. Asymptotic statistics of the n-sided pla- in the korean highway. Europhysics Letters, 81:48005,
narpoisson-voronoicell: I.exactresults. J.Stat.Mech., 2008.
2005:P09005, 2005. [180] D. Jungnickel. Graphs, networks, and algorithms. In
[159] H.J. Hilhorst. The perimeter of large planar voronoi Algorithm and computation in mathematics, vol. 5.
cells: a double-stranded random walk. J. Stat. Mech., Springer Verlag, Heidelberg, 1999.
2005:L02003, 2005. [181] M. Kaiser and C.C. Hilgetag. Spatial growth of real-
[160] H.J. Hilhorst. Statistical properties of planar voronoi world networks. Phys. Rev. E, 69:036103, 2004.
tessellations. Eur. Phys. J. B, 64:437 – 441, 2008. [182] M. Kaiser and C.C. Hilgetag. Modelling the develop-
[161] B.HillierandJ.Hanson.Thesociallogicofspace.Cam- mentofcorticalsystemsnetworks. Neurocomputing,58-
bridge University Press, Cambridge, 1984. 60:297 – 302, 2004.
[162] C.J. Honey, O. Sporns, L. Cammoun, X. Gigandet, J.- [183] M. Kaiser and C.C. Hilgetag. Nonoptimal component
P. Thiran, R. Meuli, and P. Hagmann. Predicting hu- placement, but short processing paths, due to long-
man resting-state functional connectivity from struc- distance projections in neural systems. PLoS Comp.
tural connectivity. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. (USA), 106: Biol., 2:0805 – 0815, 2005.
2035 – 2040, 2010. [184] V. Kalapala, V. Sanwalani, A. Clauset, and C. Moore.
[163] H.Hong,M.Y.Choi,andB.J.Kim. Synchronizationon Scale invariance in road networks. Phys. Rev. E, 73:
small-world networks. Phys. Rev. E, 65:026139, 2002. 026130, 2006.
[164] H. Hu, S. Myers, V. Colizza, and A. Vespignani. Wifi [185] P. Kaluza, A. Koelzsch, M.T. Gastner, and B. Blasius.
epidemiology: can your neighbors’ router make yours The complex network of global cargo ship movements.
sick ? Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. (USA), 106:1318 – 1323, J. R. Soc. Interface, 7:1093 – 1103, 2010.
2009. [186] K. Kansky. Structure of transportation networks: rela-
[165] Y.HuandD.Zhu. Empiricalanalysisoftheworldwide tionships between network geometry and regional char-
maritime transportation network. Physica A, 388:2061 acteristics. UniversityofChicagoPress,Chicago,1969.
– 2071, 2009. [187] E.Katifori.Damageandfluctuationsinduceloopsinop-
[166] Y. Hu, Y. Wang, D. Li, S. Havlin, and Z. Di. Maxi- timaltransportnetworks. Phys. Rev. Lett.,104:048704,
mizingentropyyieldsspatialscalinginsocialnetworks. 2010.
arXiv, page 1002.1802, 2010. [188] M.J.Keeling,M.E.J.Woolhouse,R.M.May,G.Davies,
[167] J.-P. Hubert and P.L. Toint. From average travel time and B.T. Grenfell. Modelling vaccination strategies
budgets to daily travel time distributions: appraisal of against foot-and-mouth disease. Nature, 421:136 – 142,
two conjectures by koelbl and helbing and some conse- 2003.
quences. Journal of the Transportation research board, [189] E.KenahandJ.M.Robins.Secondlookatthespreadof
1985:135 – 143, 2007. epidemics on networks. Phys. Rev. E, 76:036113, 2007.
[168] M.L. Huson and A. Sen. Broadcast scheduling algo- [190] S. Khuller, B. Raghavachari, and N. Young. Balancing
rithms for radio networks. Militart Communications minimumspanningtreesandshortest-pathtrees. Algo-
Conference, IEEE MILCOM ’95, 2:647 – 651, 1995. rithmica, 14:305 – 321, 1995.
[169] R.FerreriCanchoandR.V.Sol´e. Optimizationincom- [191] P.D. Killworth and H.R. Bernard. The reversal small-
plexnetworks. InStatisticalMechanicsofComplexNet- world experiment. Soc. Networks, 1:159 – 192, 1978.
works, volume 625 of Lecture Notes in Physics, pages [192] R.Kinney,P.Crucitti,R.Albert,andV.Latora.Model-
114 – 125. Springer, 2003. ingcascadingfailuresinthenorthamericanpowergrid.
[170] T.S. Jackson and N. Read. Theory of minimum span- Eur. Phys. J. B, 46:101, 2005.
ning trees. i. mean-field theory and strongly disordered [193] G. Kirchoff. Uber die auslosung der gleichungen, auf
spin-glass model. Phys. Rev. E, 81:021130, 2010. welchemanbeideruntersuchungderlinearenverteilung
[171] T.C. Jarrett, D.J. Ashton, M. Fricker, and N.F. John- galvanischer strome gefurhrtwird. Ann. Phys. und
son. Interplay between function and structure in com- Chemie, 72:497 – 508, 1847.
83
[194] J. Kleinberg. The small-wolrd phenomenon: an algo- for optimal transport networks. Phys. Rev. Lett., 104:
rithmic perspective, 1999. Technical report 99-1776, 018701, 2010.
Cornell Computer Science. [216] W.LiandX.Cai.Statisticalanalysisofairportnetwork
[195] J. M. Kleinberg. Navigation in a small world. Nature, of china. Phys. Rev. E, 69:046106, 2004.
406:845, 2000. [217] D. Liben-Nowell, J. Nowak, R. Kumar, P. Raghavan,
[196] R. Koelbl and D. Helbing. Energy and scaling laws in andA.Tomkins. Geographicroutinginsocialnetworks.
human travel behaviour. New Journal of Physics, 5:48, Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. (USA), 102:11623 – 11628, 2005.
2003. [218] P.G.Lind,J.A.C.Gallas,andH.J.Herrmann. Coher-
[197] K.Kosmidis,S.Havlin,andA.Bunde. Structuralprop- ence in scale-free networks of chaotic maps. Phys. Rev.
ertiesofspatiallyembeddednetworks. EurophysicsLet- E, 70:056207, 2004.
ters, 82:48005, 2008. [219] B. Luo, R.C. Wilson, and E.R. Hancock. Spectral em-
[198] B. Kozma, M.B. Hastings, and G. Korniss. Diffusion beddingofgraphs. Pattern recognition,36:2213–2230,
processonpower-lawsmall-worldnetworks. Phys. Rev. 2003.
Lett., 95:018701, 2005. [220] H.Makse,J.S.Andrade,M.Batty,andS.Havlin. Mod-
[199] B.Kozma,M.B.Hastings,andG.Korniss.Processeson elingurbangrowthpatternswithcorrelatedpercolation.
small-world networks with distance-dependent random Phys. Rev. E, 58:7054, 1998.
links. J.Stat. Mech., page P08014, 2007. [221] S. S. Manna and P. Sen. Modulated scale-free network
[200] G. Krings, F. Calabrese, C. Ratti, and V.D. Blondel. in euclidean space. Phys. Rev. E, 66:066114, 2002.
Agravitymodelforinter-citytelephonecommunication [222] S. S. Manna, D. Dhar, and S.N. Majumdar. Spanning
networks. J. Stat. Mech, 2009:L07003, 2009. treesintwodimensions. Phys. Rev. A,46:R4471,1992.
[201] D. Krioukov, F. Papadopoulos, M. Kitsak, A. Vahdat, [223] A. Maritan, F. Colaiori, A. Flammini, M. Cieplak, and
and M. Bogun`a. Hyperbolic geometry of complex net- J.R.Banavar. Universalityclassesofoptimalnetworks.
works. Phys. Rev. E, 82:036106, 2010. Science, 272:984 – 986, 1996.
[202] M. Kurant and P. Thiran. Layered complex networks. [224] A.P.Masucci,D.Smith,A.Crooks,andM.Batty. Ran-
Phys. Rev. Lett., 96:138701, 2006. domplanargraphsandthelondonstreetnetwork. Eur.
[203] M. Kurant and P. Thiran. Extraction and analysis of Phys. J. B, 71:259 – 271, 2009.
trafficandtopologiesoftransportationnetworks. Phys. [225] N. Masuda, H. Miwa, and N. Konno. Geographical
Rev. E, 74:036114, 2006. threshold graphs with small-world and scale-free prop-
[204] L. F. Lago-Fernandez, R. Huerta, F. Corbacho, and erties. Phys. Rev. E, 71:036108, 2005.
J. A. Siguenza. Fast response and temporal coding [226] N.MathiasandV.Gopal. Small-worlds: howandwhy.
on coherent oscillations in small-world networks. Phys. Phys. Rev. E, 63:021117, 2001.
Rev. Lett., 84:2758, 2000. [227] C. McDiarmid, A. Steger, and D.J.A. Welsh. Random
[205] R.Lambiotte,V.D.Blondel,C.deKerchove,E.Huens, planargraphs.JournalofCombinatorialTheory,93:187
C.Prieur,Z.Smoreda,andP.VanDooren. Geographi- – 205, 2005.
cal dispersal of mobile communication networks. Phys- [228] T.A. McMahon and J.T. Bonner. On size and Life.
ica A, 387:5317 – 5325, 2008. Scientific American Library, New York, 1983.
[206] S. Lammer, B. Gehlsen, and D. Helbing. Scaling laws [229] M. M´ezard, G. Parisi, and M.-A. Virasoro. Spin glass
inthespatialstructureofurbanroadnetworks. Physica and beyond. World Scientific, 1987.
A, 363:89, 2006. [230] S. Milgram. The small world problem. Psychology To-
[207] V. Latora and M. Marchiori. Is the boston subway a day, 2:60 – 67, 1967.
small-world network ? Physica A, 314:109 – 113, 2001. [231] R. Milo, S. Shen-Orr, S. Itzkovitz, N. Kashtan,
[208] V.LatoraandM.Marchiori.Efficientbehaviorofsmall- D. Chklovskii, and U. Alon. Network motifs: simple
world networks. Phys. Rev. Lett., 87:198701, 2001. building blocks of complex networks. Science, 298:824,
[209] V.LatoraandM.Marchiori. Economicsmall-worldbe- 2002.
havior in weighted networks. Eur. Phys. J. B, 32:249, [232] D.S. Modha and R. Singh. Network architecture of the
2003. long-distance pathways in the macaque brain. Proc.
[210] V. Latora and M. Marchiori. Vulnerability and pro- Natl Acad. Sci. (USA), 107:13485 – 13490, 2009.
tection of infrastructure networks. Phys. Rev. E, 71: [233] P.L. Mokhtarian and C. Chen. Ttb or not ttb, that
015103(R), 2005. is the question: a review and analysis of the empirical
[211] K. Lee, W.-S. Jung, J.S. Park, and M.Y. Choi. Statis- literature on travel time (and money) budgets. Trans-
tical analysis of the metropolitan seoul subway system: portation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 38:643
networkstructureandpassengerflows. Physica A,387: – 675, 2004.
6231 – 6234, 2008. [234] M. Molloy and B. Reed. A critical point for random
[212] D.LevinsonandA.El-Geneidy. Theminimumcircuity graphs with a given degree sequence. Random Struct.
frontier and the journey to work. Regional science and Algorithms, 6:161, 1995.
urban economics, 39:732 – 738, 2007. [235] R. Monasson. Diffusion, localization and dispersion re-
[213] D. Levinson and Y. Wu. The rational locator reexam- lations on small-world lattices. Eur. Phys. B, 12:555 –
ined: Are travel times still stable ? Transportation, 32: 567, 1999.
187 – 202, 2005. [236] C. Moore and M.E.J. Newman. Exact solution of site
[214] D. Levinson and B. Yerra. Self-organization of surface and bond percolation on small-world networks. Phys.
transportation networks. Transportation Science, 40: Rev. E, 62:7059 – 7064, 2000.
179 – 188, 2006. [237] A.A. Moreira, J.S. Andrade Jr, H.J. Herrmann, and
[215] G. Li, S.D.S. Reis, A.A. Moreira, S. Havlin, H.E. Stan- J.O.Indekeu.Howtomakeafragilenetworkrobustand
ley, and J.S. Andrade Jr. Towards design principles vice-versa. Physical Review Lett., 102:018701, 2009.
84
[238] Y. Moreno, M. Nekovee, and A. Vespignani. Efficiency 853 – 866, 2006.
and reliability of epidemic data dissemination in com- [261] J. Quantanilla, S. Torquato, and R.M. Ziff. Efficient
plex networks. Phys. Rev. E, 69:055101, 2004. measurementofthepercolationthresholdforfullypen-
[239] C.F. Moukarzel and M. Argollo de Menezes. Shortest etrable discs. Phys. A, 33:L399, 2000.
pathsonsystemswithpower-lawdistributedlong-range [262] S. Rambaldi, A. Bazzani, B. Giorgini, and L. Giovan-
connections. Phys. Rev. E, 65:056709, 2002. nini. Mobility in modern cities: looking for physical
[240] D.Mukamel. Statisticalmechanicsofsystemswithlong laws. Proceedings of the ECCS’07, 132, 2007.
rangeinteractions. InA.Campa,A.Giansanti,G.Mo- [263] E.RavaszandA.-L.Baraba´si.Hierarchicalorganization
rigi, and F. Sylos Labini, editors, AIP Conference pro- in complex networks. Physical Review E, 67:026112,
ceedings: Dynamics and Thermodynamics of Systems 2003.
with Long-Range Interations: Theory and Experiments, [264] N.Read. Minimumspanningtreesandrandomresistor
volume 22, page 970. 2008. networksinddimensions.PhysicalReviewE,72:036114,
[241] J. D. Murray. Mathematical Biology. Springer, New- 2005.
York, 1993, 2nd edition. [265] P. De Los Rios. Power law size distribution of super-
[242] G.NemethandG.Vattay. Giantclustersinrandomad critical random trees. Europhys. Lett., 56:898 – 903,
hoc networks. Phys. Rev. E, 67:036110, 2003. 2001.
[243] M.E.J. Newman. Scientific collaboration networks. [266] M.R. Roberson and D. ben Avraham. Kleinberg navi-
shortestpaths,weightednetworks,andcentrality. Phys. gationinfractalsmallworldnetworks. Physical Review
Rev. E, 64:016132, 2001. E, 74:017101, 2006.
[244] M.E.J.Newman.Thestructureandfunctionofcomplex [267] G.J.RodgersandA.J.Bray.Densityofstatesofasparse
networks. SIAM Review, 45:167–256, 2003. random matrix. Phys. Rev. B, 37:3557 – 3562, 1988.
[245] M.E.J. Newman. Networks: an introduction. Oxford [268] J.-P.Rodrigue,C.Comtois,andB.Slack.Thegeography
University Press, Oxford, UK, 2010. of transport systems. Routledge, New York, NY, 2006.
[246] M.E.J.NewmanandM.Girvan.Findingandevaluating [269] I.Rodriguez-IturbeandA.Rinaldo.Fractalriverbasins:
community structure in networks. Phys. Rev. E, 69: chance and self-organization. Cambridge University
026113, 2004. Press, Cambridge, 1997.
[247] M.E.J. Newman and D.J. Watts. Scaling and percola- [270] C. Roth, S. Kang, M. Batty, and M.Barth´elemy. Com-
tion in the small-world network model. Phys. Rev. E, muting in polycentric cities. arXiv, page 1001.4915,
60:7332 – 7342, 1999. 2010.
[248] M.E.J. Newman, S.H. Strogatz, and D.J. Watts. Ran- [271] A. F. Rozenfeld, R. Cohen, D. ben Avraham, and
dom graphs with arbitrary degree distributions and S. Havlin. Scale-free networks on lattices. Phys. Rev.
their applications. Phys. Rev. E, 64:026118, 2001. Lett., 89:218701, 2002.
[249] M.E.J. Newman, I. Jensen, and R.M. Ziff. Percolation [272] H.D.Rozenfeld,J.E.Kirk,E.M.Bollt,andD.benAvra-
and epidemics in a two-dimensional small world. Phys. ham. Statistics of cycles: how loopy is your network ?
Rev. E, 65:021904, 2002. J. Phys. A, 38:4589 – 4595, 2005.
[250] J.V. Noble. Geographic and temporal development of [273] A. Runions, A. M. Fuhrer, P. Federl B. Lane, A.-G.
plagues. Nature, 250:726 – 728, 1974. Rolland-Lagan,andP.Prusinkiewicz. Modelingandvi-
[251] M.A. Nowak, S. Bonhoeffer, and R.M. May. Spatial sualizationofleafvenationpatterns.ACMTransactions
games and the maintenance of cooperation. Proc. Natl on Graphics, 24:702 – 711, 2005.
Acad. Sci. (USA), 91:4877 – 4881, 1994. [274] H. Samaniego and M.E. Moses. Cities as organisms:
[252] M.E.O’Kelly. Aquadraticintegerprogramfortheloca- allometric scaling of urban road networks. Journal of
tionofinteractionhubfacilities. JournalofOperational Transport and Land use, 1:21 – 39, 2008.
Research, 32:393 – 404, 1987. [275] S. Scellato, A. Cardillo, V. Latora, and S. Porta. The
[253] M.E. O’Kelly. Routing traffic at hub facilities. Netw. backboneofacity. Eur.Phys.J.B,50:221–225,2006.
Spat. Econ., 10:173 – 191, 2010. [276] S. Scellato, C. Mascolo, M. Musolesi, and V. Latora.
[254] M. Ozana. Incipient spanning cluster on small-world Distance matters: Geo-social metrics for online social
networks. Europhys. Lett., 55:762, 2001. networks.InProceedingsofthe3rdWorkshoponOnline
[255] R. Pastor-Satorras and A. Vespignani. Evolution and Social Networks, WOSN 2010, Boston, USA, 2010.
structureoftheInternet: Astatisticalphysicsapproach. [277] M.SchreckenbergandR.Selten. Human behaviour and
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2003. traffic networks. Springer Verlag, Berlin, 2004.
[256] R.Pastor-Satorras,A.Va´zquez,andA.Vespignani.Dy- [278] M. Schwartz. Telecommunication networks: protocols,
namicalandcorrelationpropertiesoftheinternet.Phys. modellingandanalysis. Addison-WesleyLongmanPub-
Rev. Lett., 87:258701, 2001. lishing, Boston, 1986.
[257] L.M.PecoraandT.L.Carroll.Masterstabilityfunctions [279] K.A. Seaton and L.M. Hackett. Stations, trains and
for synchronized coupled systems. Phys. Rev. Lett., 80: small-world networks. Physica A, 339:635 – 644, 2004.
2109, 1998. [280] P. Sen and B.K. Chakrabarti. Small-world phenomena
[258] M.D.Penrose. Thelongestedgeoftherandomminimal andthestatisticsoflinearpolymer.J.Phys.A,34:7749,
spanning tree. Annals of Applied Probability, 7:340 – 2001.
361, 1997. [281] P. Sen and S.S. Manna. Clustering properties of a gen-
[259] T.PetermannandP.DeLosRios. Spatialsmall-worlds eralized critical euclidean network. Phys. Rev. E, 68:
networks: awiring-costperspective.ArXiv,pagescond– 026104, 2003.
mat/0501420, 2005. [282] P. Sen, K. Banerjee, and T. Biswas. Phase transitions
[260] S.Porta,P.Crucitti,andV.Latora. Thenetworkanal- inanetworkwitharange-dependentconnectionproba-
ysis of urban streets: a dual approach. Physica A, 369: bility. Phys. Rev. E, 66:037102, 2002.
85
[283] P. Sen, S. Dasgupta, A. Chatterjee, P. A. Sreeram, M.A. Miller, and B.T. Grenfell. Synchrony, waves, and
G.Mukherjee,andS.S.Manna. Small-worldproperties spatial hierarchies in the spread of influenza. Science,
oftheindianrailwaynetwork. Phys.Rev.E,67:036106, 312:447 – 451, 2006.
2003. [305] C. von Ferber, T. Holovatch, Y. Holovach, and
[284] M. Angeles Serrano, D. Krioukov, and M. Bogun˜a´. V. Palchykov. Public transport networks: empirical
Self-similarity of complex networks and hidden metric analysis and modeling. Eur. Phys. J. B, 68:261 – 275,
spaces. Phys. Rev. Lett., 100:078701, 2008. 2009.
[285] A. Sevtsuk and C. Ratti. Does urban mobility have [306] I.Vragovic,E.Louis,andA.Diaz-Guilera. Efficiencyof
a daily routine ? learning from the aggregate data of informationaltransferinregularandcomplexnetworks.
mobile networks. Journal of Urban Technology, 17:41 – Phys. Rev. E, 71:036122, 2005.
60, 2010. [307] T.M. Walski, E.D. Brill, J. Gessler, I.C. Goulter, R.M.
[286] J. Sienkiewicz and J.A. Holyst. Statistical analysis of Jeppson,K.Lansey,L.Han-Lin,J.C.Liebman,L.Mays,
22 public transport networks in poland. Phys. Rev. E, D.R. Morgan, and L. Ormsbee. Battle of the network
72:046127, 2005. models: epilogue.J.WaterResour.Plan.Manage.,113:
[287] H.A.Simon. Onaclassofskewdistributionfunctions. 191 – 203, 1987.
Biometrika, 42:425, 1955. [308] P. Wang, M. Gonzalez, C.A. Hidalgo, and A.-L.
[288] R.V.Sol´e,M.Rosas-Casals,B.Corominas-Murtra,and Barabasi. Understandingthespreadingpatternsofmo-
S. Valverde. Robustness of the european power grids bile phone viruses. Science, 324:1071 – 1076, 2009.
underintentionalattack.Phys.Rev.E,77:026102,2008. [309] J.G. Wardrop. Some theoretical aspects of road traffic
[289] C.Song,S.Havlin,andH.Makse.Self-similarityincom- research. Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engi-
plex networks. Nature, 433:392 – 395, 2005. neers, 1:325 – 378, 1952.
[290] C.Song,T.Koren,P.Wang,andA.-L.Barabasi. Mod- [310] C. P. Warren, L. M. Sander, and I. M. Sokolov. Geog-
elling the scaling properties of human mobility. Nature raphy in a scale-free network model. Phys. Rev. E, 66:
Physics, 2010. 056105, 2002.
[291] D.StaufferandA.Aharony. IntroductiontoPercolation [311] C. P. Warren, L. M. Sander, and I. M. Sokolov. Fire-
Theory. Taylor & Francis, London, 1992. walls, disorder, and percolation in epidemics. arXiv,
[292] J.M. Steele. Growth rates of euclidean minimal span- page 0106450, 2002.
ning trees with power weighted edges. The Annals of [312] C. P. Warren, L. M. Sander, and I. M. Sokolov. Epi-
Probability, 16:1767 – 1787, 1988. demics,disorder,andpercolation. PhysicaA,325:1–8,
[293] A.K.M.Stoneham.Thesmall-worldprobleminaspatial 2003.
context. Env. and Plann. A, 9:185 – 195, 1977. [313] D.J.WattsandD.H.Strogatz. Collectivedynamicsof
[294] E.Strano,A.Cardillo,V.Iacoviello,V.Latora,R.Mes- small-world networks. Nature, 393:440, 1998.
sora, S. Porta, and S. Scellato. Street centrality vs. [314] B.M. Waxman. Routing of multipoint connections.
commerce and service locations in cities: a kernel den- IEEE J. Select. Areas. Commun., 6:1617, 1988.
sity correlation case study in bologna, italy. Env. and [315] G.H. Weiss. Aspects and Applications of random walk.
Plann. B: Planning and Design, 36:450 – 465, 2009. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1994.
[295] J. Sun and D. ben Avraham. Greedy connectivity of [316] G.B. West and J.H. Brown. The origin of allometric
geographically embedded graphs. Phys. Rev. E, 82: scalinglawsinbiologyfromgenomestoecosystems: To-
016109, 2010. wardsaquantitativeunifyingtheoryofbiologicalstruc-
[296] E.J. Taaffe and H.L. Gauthier Jr. Geography of trans- tureandorganization. JournalofExperimentalBiology,
portation.PrencticeHall,EnglewoodCliffs,NewJersey, 208:1575 – 1592, 2003.
1973. [317] G.B. West, J.H. Brown, and B.J. Enquist. General
[297] H. Takayasu, M. Takayasu, A. Provata, and G. Huber. modelfortheoriginofallometricscalinglawsinbiology.
Statistical properties of aggregation with injection. J. Science, 276:122, 1997.
Stat. Phys., 65:725, 1991. [318] A.G.Wilson. Astatisticaltheoryofspatialdistribution
[298] A. Tero, S. Takaji, T. Saigusa, K. Ito, D.P. Bebber, models. Transportation Research, 1:253 – 269, 1967.
M.D. Fricker, K. Yumiki, R. Kobayashi, and T. Naka- [319] L.H.Wong,P.Pattison,andG.Robins.Aspatialmodel
gaki. Rules for biologically inspired adaptive network for social networks. Physica A, 360:99 – 120, 2006.
design. Science, 327:439 – 442, 2010. [320] Z. Wu, L.A. Braunstein, S. Havlin, and H.E. Stanley.
[299] H.P. Thadakamalia, R. Albert, and S.R.T. Kumara. Transport in weighted networks: Partition into super-
Search in spatial scale-free networks. New Journal of highways and roads. Phys. Rev. Lett., 96:148702, 2006.
Physics, 9:190, 2007. [321] D.R. Wuellner, S. Roy, and R.M. D’Souza. Structure
[300] C. Thiemann, F. Theis, D. Grady, R. Brune, and and resilience of networks: Airlines in usa. arXiv, page
D. Brockmann. The structure of borders in a small 0901.0774, 2009.
world. ArXiv, page 1001.0943, 2010. [322] F.XieandD.Levinson.Measuringthestructureofroad
[301] W. Tutte. An census of planar maps. Canadian J. networks. Geographical analysis, 39:336 – 356, 2007.
Math., 15:249 – 271, 1963. [323] X. Xu, J. Hu, F. Liu, and L. Liu. Scaling and correla-
[302] S. Valverde, R. Ferrer Cancho, and R. V. Sol´e. Scale- tions in 3 bus-transport networks of china. Physica A,
freenetworksfromoptimaldesign. Europhys. Lett., 60: 374:441, 2007.
512–517, 2002. [324] X.Xu,J.Hu,andP.Liu.Empiricalanalysisoftheship-
[303] A. Va´zquez, R. Pastor-Satorras, and A. Vespignani. transport network of china. Chaos, 17:023129, 2007.
Large-scaletopologicalanddynamicalpropertiesofthe [325] R. Xulvi-Brunet and I. M. Sokolov. Evolving networks
internet. Phys. Rev. E, 65:066130, 2002. with disadvantaged long-range connections. Phys. Rev.
[304] C. Viboud, O.N. Bjornstad, D.L. Smith, L. Simonsen, E, 66:026118, 2002.
86
[326] A.YazdaniandP.Jeffrey. Acomplexnetworkapproach [332] E.W.Zegura,K.L.Calvert,andS.Bhattacharjee. How
to robustness and vulnerability of spatially organized tomodelaninternetwork.ProceedingsofIEEEInfocom,
waterdistributionnetworks. InsubmittedtoWaterDis- pages 594 – 602, 1996.
tributionSystemAnalysisConference,WDSA2010,AZ, [333] Z. Zhang, L. Chen, S. Zhou, L. Fang, J. Guan, and
USA, 2010. T. Zou. Analytical solution of average path length for
[327] B.M. Yerra and D.M. Levinson. The emergence of hi- apollonian networks. Phys. Rev. E, 77:017102, 2008.
erarchyintransportationnetworks. Ann. Reg. Sci., 39: [334] Z. Zhang, J. Guang, B. Ding, L. Chen, and S. Zhou.
541 – 553, 2005. Contact graphs of disk packings as a model of spatial
[328] S.-H. Yook, H. Jeong, A.-L. Barabasi, and Y. Tu. planar networks. New J. of Phys., 11:083007, 2009.
Weightedevolvingnetworks. Phys.Rev. Lett.,86:5835– [335] H. Zhu and Z.-X. Huang. Navigation in a small world
5838, 2001. with local information. Phys. Rev. E, 70:021101, 2004.
[329] S.-H. Yook, H. Jeong, and A.-L. Barabasi. Modeling [336] R.M.ZiffandR.D.Vigil.Kineticsandfractalproperties
the internet’s large-scale topology. Proc. Natl. Acad. oftherandomsequentialadsorptionoflinesegments. J.
Sci. (USA), 99:13382, 2002. Phys. A: Math. Gen., 23:5103 – 5108, 1990.
[330] Y.Zahavi. TheUMOTmodel. TheWorldBank,Wash- [337] G.K. Zipf. The p p /d hypothesis: on the intercity
1 2
ington, DC, 1977. movement of persons. American Sociological Review,
[331] A.Zalesky,A.Fornito,I.H.Harding,L.Cocchi,M.Yu- 11:677 – 686, 1946.
cel, C. Pantelis, and E.T. Bullmore. Whole-brain [338] G.K. Zipf. Human behaviour and the principle of least
anatomicalnetworks: doesthechoiceofnodematters? effort. Addison-Wesley, Cambridge,MA, 1949.
NeuroImage, 50:970 – 983, 2010.

