References:

Annexes/Appendices:

Body Text:
2019 IEEE 5th World Forum on Internet of Things (WF-IoT)
The Internet of Things for Intelligent Transportation
Systems in Real Smart Cities Scenarios
Alberto Attilio Brincat Federico Pacifici Stefano Martinaglia Francesco Mazzola
T.Net S.p.A. T.Net S.p.A. T.Net S.p.A. T.Net S.p.A.
Catania, Italy Catania, Italy M i l a n , I t a l y Milan, Italy
abrincat@tnet.it fpacifici@tnet.it s m a r t i n a g l i a @ t net.it fmazzola@tnet.it
Abstract — This paper represents an overview on activities The infrastructure monitoring that includes inclinometers
done in real Smart Cities scenarios using IoT Technologies for and probes (i.e. for humidity, water on the road surface, etc.) can
Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS). Nowadays, there are enable prescriptive maintenance and alert driver or autonomous
several use cases related to IoT for ITS, such as connected and car for event-based driving. Predictions and prescriptions can be
autonomous vehicles, cooperative transportation networks and done in a real-time fashion, considering heterogeneous networks
smart roads in order to improve data propagation, create in a homogeneous environment plus standardized metrics that
heterogeneous connectivity and low latency applications in high compared with the sensed ones ensure zero error on the
capacity environments. ITS techniques can be also applied on
measurement. In this scenario, prescriptive maintenance is an
logistics, so accuracy on delivery and timing can be improved
increasing sector for smart cities, it consists on a trained artificial
consider all the involved ecosystems, baseline and standardized
intelligence network that monitors and detects anomalies to
architectures in interconnected Smart Cities for future
recognize how and when an anomaly may occur. Machine
development and integration. Secure correlations between vehicles
learning plays a fundamental role in these kind of algorithms that
and smart roads can optimize road safety and traffic flow, reduce
represents the natural evolution of predictive algorithms.
incidents, avoid congestions etc. These technologies comprise also
Several activities should be planned to optimize algorithms and
V2X (Vehicle to Everything). In this scenario, the cloud-based
LoRa (Long Range) and mesh networks technologies, can play an techniques enabling new high value services.
important role for the propagation of intelligent sensed data and
The communication protocols adopted for these purposes are
localization. The Smart Roads scenario is considered as one of the
mainly wireless, due to several emerging solutions that allow to
most attractive field in a Smart City environment. The right choice
improve the performance of radio connections even in harsh
on technology, delay and frequency represents an important factor
environment, non-optimal conditions and long distances. The
to be considered for standardization and engineering activities.
main wireless technologies proposed for real Smart Cities
scenarios for ITS are: LoRaWAN (Long Range Wide Area
Keywords—ITS, V2X, Smart Cities, Smart Roads, IoT, Cloud,
LoRa, 6LoW, Prescriptive Maintenance, Machine Learning Network) long range and battery saver, mesh networks for
extend wireless coverage and protocols related to the 6LoWs
I. INTRODUCTION (IPv6 over Low Power Network) family, WLAN-based IEEE
802.11p for V2V (Vehicle to Vehicle) and V2I (Vehicle to
Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) can improve
Infrastructure) [2]. These components can be used in a real
mobility and logistics. IoT (Internet of Things) techniques [1]
Smart Cities environment where smart roads and connected
applied to mobility or vehicular traffic, can introduce many
intelligent vehicles can play a crucial role. The goal is therefore
benefits such as reducing the number of accidents, optimize the
to create networks that integrate the various components and
road traffic and avoid pollution in Smart Cities.
manage the information coming from IoT based sensors towards
Several use cases can be applicable in logistics, where intelligent transportation systems (ITS).
transport of goods on autonomous vehicles can be done in secure
The sections of this paper are structured as follows, in section
monitored infrastructures in order to reduce product delivery
2 the main IoT communication protocols proposed for ITS and
time choosing optimal routes for packages and goods
Smart Roads in Smart Cities are showed, with a particular focus
destination. These use cases comprise road traffic solutions with
on LoRa and how this technology can be used for a more
cloud-based systems and sensors installed on road surface and/or
accurate devices localization, 6LoW technologies for mesh
guard rail that count, classify and detect vehicles through
networks, IEEE 802.11 for V2V and V2I. Section 3 shows the
advanced machine learning techniques, artificial neural
applicable machine learning algorithms and how they can
networks and data mining that learn and avoid congestions and
improve efficiency in real scenarios. Finally Section 4 shows a
accidents. The framework outperforms on high density corridors
reference architectures and a table that summarize several ITS
where the secure road side unit (RSU) enable an enhanced way
use cases related to real smart cities scenarios.
to forward packets to the network through low latency
algorithms that prevent unexpected accidents and enable a
priority and secure route through VPN (Virtual Private Network)
tunneling.
978-1-5386-4980-0/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Princeton University. Downloaded on February 06,2024 at 16:35:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
978-1-5386-4980-0/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE 128
2019 IEEE 5th World Forum on Internet of Things (WF-IoT)
II. COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGIES FOR ITS d) IEEE 1609.4 deals with providing further processing to
MAC 802.11 in order to operate according to WAVE and offers
In this section the main communication technologies
an abstraction of the physical layer at the higher layers.
adopted for V2X communication, 6Low and LoRaWAN will be
discussed. The main operating characteristics are showed with C. LoRaWAN
their pros and cons. Furthermore, a focus on devices localization
LoRa stands for Long Range and addresses long-distance
is given, evaluating how the introduced technologies could
wireless modulation technology with low battery consumption.
improve the current state of art.
For these reasons, this protocol is often used in the IoT field and
A. IEEE 802.11p therefore in ITS for Smart Roads in Smart Cities mainly. Being
a low power technology, it’s composed by FSK (Frequency Shift
The IEEE 802.11 standard is one of the main protocols
Keying) modulation at PHY layer that guarantees efficiency and
adopted in wireless communications.
low consumption, with chirp spread spectrum that allows to
In order to meet the communications requirements between improve the communication range while maintaining the
vehicles (V2V) and between vehicles and infrastructures (V2I), characteristics of a traditional FSK. These PHY layer features
in 1992 the DSRC (Dedicated Short Range Communications) are extended to higher layers by LoRaWAN standard that
protocol [2] was introduced for ITS low and medium-range establishes communication protocols, system architecture and
communications in a band of amplitude around 75 MHz to 5.9 network for Low Power Wide Area Network (LPWAN).
GHz (5.850-5.925 GHz) divided into 7 channels of 10 MHz
LoRaWAN technology provides bidirectional communication
amplitude for each one. Most of these channels are accessible to
and star of stars topology. The topology choice is justified by the
individual users, but there are some reserved such as the CCH
possibility of long range communications, moreover one or more
(Control Channel) reserved only for security communications
gateways can be reached by a node. In fact, within a LoRaWAN
and the last two channels at the end of the dedicated portion of
network each node is not associated with a specific gateway, so
the spectrum, reserved for future developments. With these
multiple gateways can receive the same information transmitted
physical layer specifications, the signal is optimal for vehicular
by a single node.
communications, and allows further propagation in case of
several multipath inside a smart city, such as vehicles, building, The main components of a typical LoRaWAN network are the
etc. [3]. following:
For adapt the DSRC to the existing IEEE 802.11a 1) End nodes: sensors or actuators that exchange compatible
infrastructure, in 2004 the WAVE (Wireless Access in Vehicular data with LoRaWAN technology to gateways;
Environments) amendment was introduced. One of the
2) Gateway: collect and forward the information from the
substantial changes introduced is IEEE 802.11 MAC layer
various sensors and send them to the Network Server through
optimization for high-speed and low latency communications
the backhaul following a cloud based approach. Gateway can be
with potential safety contents, typical of ITS communications.
set as packet-forwarder and/or LoRa Gateway Bridge;
In particular, the association procedure prior to the
communication of a node to its own BSS (Base Service Set) is 3) Network Server: provides intelligence to the network,
simplified. Some variants of these are introduced, called WBSS, typically manages the received data and eliminates any
that is WAVE BSS, which allow a node to communicate after redundancy;
receiving only one signaling message, i.e. considering a
compatible BSS, it is possible for each node to receive or 4) Application Server: they are connected to the Network
transmit a message without belonging to a specific BSS. Servers through TCP / IP connections and allow access to the
LoRaWAN network to the end users;
The reference architecture is showed in [4]. IEEE 802.11p is
mainly associated to the PHY and MAC layers. The highest 5) Geolocation Solver: communicates with Application Server
layers are managed by the IEEE 1609.x standards family. and Network Server and provides positional information.
B. IEEE 1609.x standards In order to keep energy consumption low and increase
potential network scalability, the data rate management is
As seen in [3], the IEEE 1609.x standards deal extending
optimized through configurable up links and down links.
WAVE to the higher layers, with the IEEE 802.11p standard as
End nodes in a network can be heterogeneous, so they can be
a reference for the lower layers as seen above. IEEE 1609.x
implemented to belong to different classes. Each class differs
consists of 4 standards that define the architecture, the
from the others for the management of the down link and up-
communication model, even in contexts where safety and the
link, in order to create versatile devices adapted to different
offered services at transport layer are required:
application needs. There are 3 devices classes:
a) IEEE 1609.1 is the reference standard for the APP layer,
1) Class A: each device up link is followed by two down
regulates the interfaces and resources to be used and the
links chosen by each end node in an autonomous way, the most
messages format
constrained devices belong to this class;
b) IEEE 1609.2 defines the safety messages format and when
2) Class B: in addition to what standardized for class A
they must be used
devices, in this class there are over time extra scheduled down
c) IEEE 1609.3 regulates the transport and network layer link slots;
through the WSMP (WAVE Short Messages Protocol)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Princeton University. Downloaded on February 06,2024 at 16:35:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
129
2019 IEEE 5th World Forum on Internet of Things (WF-IoT)
3) Class C: devices belonging to this category always keep An example is 6LoWPAN, that is a communication protocol
the downlink window active, inactivating it during the uplink used within wireless personal area networks. The main purpose
of the latter is to carry out a link between the IPv6 addressing
phase, clearly this class is the most complex in terms of energy
and the IEEE 802.15.4 standard which precisely defines the
consumption.
PHY and MAC layers of the WPANs.
The wasted power therefore change according to the Considering the characteristics of the devices belonging to
belonging class. There are also some PHY parameters to WPANs, IPv4 addressing can be very consuming for such
consider, for example the spreading factor, that is the ratio devices. 6LoWPAN breaks down these barriers by providing ad
between number of chip per second and symbol rate. As shown hoc optimization for constrained devices. It can be considered as
in [5], with increasing spreading factor and with the same an intermediate layer within the IEEE 802.15.4 stack that is
distance, the output power decreases. interposed between the MAC and IPv6 layers, which provides a
compression of the latter to make it more efficient at the
In addition to the already listed features, an important
underlying layers.
application of LoRaWAN is geolocation.
The main optimization concerns the compression of the IPv6
In fact, the current GPS (Global Positioning System) technology
header by reducing the redundancy of some elements that can be
is potentially inadequate in particular contexts for IoT LPWANs
deduced from the link layer.
application in Smart Cities for indoor and outdoor localization,
where the energy saving is one of the main problems in the In ITS field, 6LoWPAN [9] can be one of the main technologies
communication phase. One of the choice of using LoRaWAN as for smart roads where sensor nodes in high density network are
an alternative protocol for low power devices geolocation is the connected to other components of the network exchanging
greater bandwidth than other IoT LPWANs technologies. intelligent vehicle data.
In [6] there is an example of geolocation implementation
III. MACHINE LEARNING TECHNIQUES FOR ITS
using LoRaWAN and an analysis of the main localization
Machine Learning (ML) techniques is also a way to optimize
techniques for this kind of networks.
and create powerful and advanced ITS. Its main scope is to
In order to estimate the position of a node, a localization extract patterns from a set of data and based on a specific event
technique called multilateration is usually used, which consists to make decisions independently.
in locating a device calculating the different energy waves
Future ITS environments are going to be always richer of these
arrival time, typically RF with known propagation speed, from
ML algorithms, especially regarding autonomous driving, which
a transmitter source to one or more receivers. The difference
according to some forecasts, will reach a level of reliability
between the various signal arrival times is typically indicated by
higher to human driving in 2030 [10].
TDOA (Time Difference of Arrivals). This localization is only
possible if the signal transmitted by the source is received by In addition to autonomous driving, Machine Learning
three or more receivers. For these reasons, LoRaWAN is able to algorithms are often applied to connected vehicles that are
satisfy the requests necessary to provide a multilateration human-driven vehicles that exchange information with a smart
localization. sensor network. There are several applications of Machine
Learning to Intelligent Transportation Systems such as smart
One of the reference LoRa localization architecture is seen
management of a traffic intersection via a sensor network [11],
in [7], where each gateway receives simultaneously the same
pedestrian and accident detection [12] [13].
synchronization uplink message from an end node and
determines its location with the principle of multilateration. Machine learning techniques widely used in this field are object
Moreover, thanks to its intrinsic properties, the LoRa signal at recognition and prescriptive maintenance.
PHY level is able to easily overcome obstacles, making it
suitable for potential indoor localization. The first consists in detecting and recognizing objects of
different nature, from the vehicle to a pedestrian to a simple
LoRaWAN geolocation is influenced by several factors that obstacle. This is implemented using ad-hoc deep neural
determine its accuracy, such as the sensitivity of each gateway's networks, that have multiple levels of complexity, called CNN
clock, the problem of multi-path in environments where there (Convolutional Neural Network) [14]. The input of these
are obstacles between the source and the destination of the signal networks are an image with relative label of the expected output.
[8], gateway density in reference area, the position algorithm The image is first subjected to a convolution operation, which
used by Geolocation Solver and placement of gateways and end- consists in submitting it to filtering in which certain features will
devices. The optimization of these factors is therefore necessary be extracted.
in order to improve the accuracy of the positioning. A practical
use case can be imaging overlapping and machine learning Therefore, the convolution output is subjected to an activation
techniques applied to improve localization. function, usually non-linear, which only allows to some
extracted feature being transported to the following layers.
D. 6LoW
This process is repeated for a number of times defined in the
6LoWs is a family of protocols that adapt IPv6 addressing to
design phase of the neural network. The more layer are present,
contexts where this addressing mode is not present natively.
the more accuracy is obtained on output result.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Princeton University. Downloaded on February 06,2024 at 16:35:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
130
At this point, after various pooling operations, the result is
submitted to the fully connected layers, which will provide the
final result, which corresponds to the prediction of the image
content.
The second ML techniques, prescriptive maintenance is an
evolution of predictive algorithms, or those classes of algorithms
that aim to detect anomalies or predict specific behaviors.
Prescriptive maintenance not only predicts, but is also able to
independently establish certain actions when they occurs in case
of an event and / or an anomaly. A similar algorithm can be
composed by two sub-modules of machine learning that
cooperate with each other.
Fig 2. Smart Cities Architecture.
Unsupervised Supervised
Features Learning Anomalies Learning Output Behavior Focusing on Smart Roads, as depicted in Figure 3, the data flow
Algorithm Algorithm
can be represented with three main blocks.
The first block collects information from sensors of various
Expected Behavior categories such as in-vehicle data, environmental models and
traffic monitoring.
Fig. 1. Prescriptive maintenance algorithm schema.
The second block process the information with AI (Artificial
Intelligence) techniques or with RF (Radio Frequency) based
measurements.
The first performs an unsupervised learning on input features by
The latter block provides the outputs for a smart city control
detecting the anomaly. The latter is a supervised learning
center or connected vehicles considering the intelligence
algorithm, for example an SVM (Support Vector Machine)
provided by the previous blocks.
classifier [15], which is trained on the basis of the anomaly and
the correlated target behavior to ensure that the expected result
is obtained. Figure 1 shows a block diagram for prescriptive
analysis and maintenance.
IV. REAL SMART CITIES SCENARIOS AND SMART ROADS
Real Smart cities scenarios can follow the architecture
represented in Figure 2. In this context, the higher levels provide
a representation of information obtained from the lowest levels,
including data statistics. About lower layer, special attention
should be done on InfoBroker and IAM (Identity Access
Manager) layers. The first collects managed information from
multiple data sources and applies several security control, such
as end-to-end encryption of transmitted data, information
decentralization and many other user’s security improvements
like authentication and location privacy. The second one creates
user roles and manage them providing data integrity protection
and avoiding potentially attacks like Sybil [16]. Fig 3. Smart Roads Data Flow in Smart Cities Scenarios.
This architecture can be the reference of further future
A sensor network for real smart road is considered using the
developments on Smart Cities WG. In this context, smart roads
communication protocols discussed in the previous sections,
cover a strategic role towards the development of advanced
sends and receives information from vehicles in a V2X (Vehicle
Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) powered by the
to Everything) context.
Internet of Things (IoT) technologies.
Table 1 shows the main requirements classified according to the
type of some environments and applications already available in
such a context.
2019 IEEE 5th World Forum on Internet of Things (WF-IoT)
Predictive Analysis Prescriptive Analysis
Traffic Management
Localization
(GPS/LoRa) Artificial Intelligence A Trd av fa fin cc Fed lo I wn f Cor om nta rt oio l n
Module
C No etn wtr oo rl kle (r
C
A Ar Nea
)
P Pr re ed scic rit piv tie
v
a en Ad
n alysis
V Ne eth wic ol re
k
I d Oe pn tt ii mfi ic za at ti io on
n
Object Recognition
Enhanced Traffic Flow
Environment Models Violation and Alert
Detection
MW oisi tn ud r, e T , Pem re p sse ura retu , r Re a, in A Reu ag lm itye n inte td er/m aci tx ioe nd Ro au nte
d
P
S
l aa fn en tyi ng
Pollution Model Traffic Congestion
Prevention
Pollution Reduction
M To rn afi ft io cr i Fn lg
o
wM
s
o ad ne dl s RF
E
vM enE tA BS aU
se
R dE DM rivE iN ngT S I ncident Reduction
Infrastructure Enhanced Traffic Flow
Authorized licensed use limited to: Princeton University. Downloaded on February 06,2024 at 16:35:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
131
2019 IEEE 5th World Forum on Internet of Things (WF-IoT)
TABLE I. INTELLIGENT SMART ROADS SENSORS PARAMETERS IN REAL REFERENCES
SMART CITIES SCENARIOS
[1] Luigi Atzori, Antonio Iera, Giacomo Morabito, “The Internet of Things:
A survey”, Computer Networks, 2010, pp. 2787-2805.
Variable Frequency Protocols Delay
[2] Vikas Taliwal, Daniel Jiang, Heiko Mangold, Chi Chen, and Raja
Temperature,
Event based, LoRaWAN Sengupta. 2004. Empirical determination of channel characteristics for
humidity,
Road surface min two times a /IEEE ≥100 ms DSRC vehicle-to-vehicle communication. In Proceedings of the 1st ACM
weigh in
day 802.11/6LoW international workshop on Vehicular ad hoc networks (VANET '04).
motion
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 88-88.
Vibration, Event based, LoRaWAN
Road [3] Sebastian Grafling, Petri Mahonen, Janne Riihijarvi,"Performance
vehicle min two times a /802.11/6Lo ≥100 ms
barriers
distances day W
evaluation of IEEE 1609 WAVE and IEEE 802.11p for vehicular
communications", 2010, Second International Conference on Ubiquitous
IEEE
Vibrations, Event based, and Future Networks (ICUFN), pp. 344–348.
802.15.4
Bridge inclinations, min two times a /LoRaWAN ≤200ms [4] D. Jiang and L. Delgrossi, "IEEE 802.11p: Towards an International
movements day /6LoW Standard for Wireless Access in Vehicular Environments," VTC Spring
IEEE 2008 - IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference, Singapore, 2008, pp.
Event based, 2036-2040.
Pressure, 802.15.4
Tunnel min two times a ≤200ms
movements /LoRaWAN [5] Bouguera T, Diouris JF, Chaillout JJ, Jaouadi R, Andrieux G. Energy
day
/6LoW Consumption Model for Sensor Nodes Based on LoRa and LoRaWAN.
Noise levels, IEEE Sensors (Basel). 2018;18(7):2104. Published 2018 Jun 30.
Event based,
Environment CO, CO 2,
min two times a
802.15.4
≤500ms
[6] B. C. Fargas and M. N. Petersen, "GPS-free geolocation using LoRa in
NO, NO 2,
day
/LoRaWAN low-power WANs," 2017 Global Internet of Things Summit (GIoTS),
brightness /6LoW Geneva, 2017, pp. 1-6.
Vehicle Event based, IEEE [7] LoRaWAN geolocation white paper, https://lora-
Parking counting, min two times a 802.15.4 ≤200ms alliance.org/sites/default/files/2018-04/geolocation_whitepaper.pdf
Area Parking Slots /802.11
day [8] Link-labs LoRa localization, https://www.link-labs.com/blog/lora-
availability /LoRaWAN
localization.
IEEE
Event based, 802.15.4 [9] Nikshepa, Pai V., Shenoy U.K.K. (2019) “6LowPan—Performance
Geolocation Analysis on Low Power Networks”, International Conference on
Road Works min two times a /802.11 ≤1ms
Management Computer Networks and Communication Technologies. Lecture Notes on
day /LoRaWAN
Data Engineering and Communications Technologies, vol 15. Springer,
/6LoW
Singapore.
Traffic data,
safety [10] Todd Litman, “Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions -
events, plate Event based, IEEE 802.11 Implications for Transport Planning”, 2018, Victoria Transport Policy
Traffic flow recognition, min two times a /HyperLan ≤10ms Institute.
day /Fiber Optic
weigh in [11] Mahmoud Pourmehrab, Lily Elefteriadou, Sanjay Ranka, Marilo Martin-
motion Gasulla, “Optimizing Signalized Intersections Performance under
Conventional and Automated Vehicles Traffic”, 2017, Cornell
University.
For each of them the main variables are highlighted, in addition
[12] E. Chen, X. Tang and B. Fu, "A Modified Pedestrian Retrieval Method
to the communication protocol, the frequency and the delay for Based on Faster R-CNN with Integration of Pedestrian Detection and Re-
some communications. As seen in Table 1, most sensors use Identification," 2018 International Conference on Audio, Language and
wireless technologies, with the exception of traffic flow sensors, Image Processing (ICALIP), Shanghai, 2018, pp. 63-66.
which could also use wired infrastructures. [13] Huang, Xiaohui & He, Pan & Rangarajan, Anand & Ranka, Sanjay.
(2019). Intelligent Intersection: Two-Stream Convolutional Networks for
Delay requirements are in most cases from 100 to 500 ms, except Real-time Near Accident Detection in Traffic Video.
for road works or traffic flow sensors that require real time [14] Jiuxiang Gu, Zhenhua Wang, Jason Kuen, Lianyang Ma, Amir
information, subjected to selected QoS and nodes density. In the Shahroudy, Bing Shuai, Ting Liu, Xingxing Wang, Gang Wang, Jianfei
Cai, Tsuhan Chen, “Recent advances in convolutional neural networks”,
most highlighted cases event based communications are
Pattern Recognition, Volume 77, 2018, pp. 354-377.
required.
[15] Ibrahim Aljarah, Ala’ M. Al-Zoubi, Hossam Faris, Mohammad A.
Hassonah, Seyedali Mirjalili, Heba Saadeh, “Simultaneous Feature
Selection and Support Vector Machine Optimization Using the
V. CONCLUSIONS Grasshopper Optimization Algorithm”, Cognitive Computation, 2018,
Volume 10, Number 3.
In this paper the main IoT technologies for ITS in the main Smart
Cities scenarios are evaluated. A main overview on [16] A. K. Mishra, A. K. Tripathy, D. Puthal and L. T. Yang, "Analytical
Model for Sybil Attack Phases in Internet of Things," in IEEE Internet of
communication protocols and innovative machine learning
Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 379-387, Feb. 2019.
technologies that play an important role in this field is provided.
Finally, additional analysis is conducted in practical scenarios.
Future tasks on this topic will be on the optimization of
LoRaWAN localization and power management, integration of
further smart cities technologies in different scenarios and an
improved analysis on complexity of event based and periodic
measurements for roads requirements.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Princeton University. Downloaded on February 06,2024 at 16:35:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
132

