References:
L. Manny et al. J o u r n a l o f E n v i r o n m e n t a l M a n a g e m e n t 318(2022)115596
review & editing. Mario Angst: Writing - review & editing. Jo¨rg Carvalho, L., 2015. Smart cities from scratch? A socio-technical perspective. Camb. J.
Rieckermann: Funding acquisition; Project administration; Supervi- Reg. Econ. Soc. 8 (1), 43–60. https://doi.org/10.1093/cjres/rsu010.
Cassidy, A., Nehorai, A., 2014. Modeling Smart Grid Adoption via a Social Network
sion; Writing - review & editing. Manuel Fischer: Conceptualization; Model. IEEE PES General Meeting | Conference & Exposition, pp. 1–5. https://doi.
Supervision; Writing - original draft; Writing - review & editing. org/10.1109/PESGM.2014.6938910, 2014.
Chopra, S.S., Khanna, V., 2014. Understanding resilience in industrial symbiosis
networks: insights from network analysis. J. Environ. Manag. 141, 86–94. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2013.12.038.
Declaration of competing interest
Cohen-Shacham, E., Walters, G., Janzen, C., Maginnis, S., 2016. Nature-based Solutions
to Address Global Societal Challenges, vol. 97. IUCN, Gland, Switzerland.
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial Cvitanovic, C., McDonald, J., Hobday, A.J., 2016. From science to action: principles for
undertaking environmental research that enables knowledge exchange and
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence evidence-based decision-making. J. Environ. Manag. 183, 864–874. https://doi.org/
the work reported in this paper. 10.1016/j.jenvman.2016.09.038.
Dai, X., Wang, L., Tao, M., Huang, C., Sun, J., Wang, S., 2021. Assessing the ecological
balance between supply and demand of blue-green infrastructure. J. Environ.
Acknowledgments Manag. 288, 112454 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2021.112454.
Dam, K.H.v., Nikolic, I., Lukszo, Z., 2013. Agent-based Modelling of Socio-Technical
Our thanks go to Kukka Ilmanen who has contributed extensively Systems. In: Deguchi, Hiroshi (Ed.), Agent-Based Social Systems, vol. 9. Springer
Netherlands.
during the entire process of data collection. We further acknowledge all
de Haan, F.J., Ferguson, B.C., Deletic, A., Brown, R.R., 2013. A socio-technical model to
survey participants and interview partners who spent their valuable explore urban water systems scenarios. Water Sci. Technol. 68 (3), 714–721. https://
time answering our questions. We would like to thank Max Maurer, doi.org/10.2166/wst.2013.299.
de Reuver, M., van der Lei, T., Lukszo, Z., 2016. How should grid operators govern smart
Arthur Petersen, Christian Binz, Thomas Bolognesi and two anonymous
grid innovation projects? An embedded case study approach. Energy Pol. 97,
reviewers for their constructive comments and feedback on the manu- 628–635. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2016.07.011.
script. This work was supported by the Federal Office for the Environ- Donati, G.F.A., Bolliger, J., Psomas, A., Maurer, M., Bach, P.M., 2022. Reconciling cities
with nature: identifying local Blue-Green Infrastructure interventions for regional
ment Switzerland (Grant no. 16.0070.PJ/R182-1359).
biodiversity enhancement. J. Environ. Manag. 316 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jenvman.2022.115254.
Supplementary Materials. Supplementary Materials Dunn, S., Fu, G., Wilkinson, S., Dawson, R., 2013. Network theory for infrastructure
systems modelling. Proc. Inst. Civ. Eng. Eng. Sustain. 166 (5), 281–292. https://doi.
org/10.1680/ensu.12.00039.
Supplementary materials to this article can be found online at Dunn, S., Wilkinson, S.M., 2013. Identifying critical components in infrastructure
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2022.115596. networks using network topology. J. Infrastruct. Syst. 19 (2), 157–165. https://doi.
org/10.1061/(ASCE)IS.1943-555X.0000120.
Eggimann, S., Mutzner, L., Wani, O., Schneider, M.Y., Spuhler, D., Moy de Vitry, M.,
References et al., 2017. The potential of knowing more: a review of data-driven urban water
management. Environ. Sci. Technol. 51 (5), 2538–2553. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acs.est.6b04267.
Aksoy, S.G., Purvine, E., Cotilla-Sanchez, E., Halappanavar, M., 2018. A generative graph
Eisenberg, D.A., Park, J., Seager, T.P., 2017. Sociotechnical network analysis for power
model for electrical infrastructure networks. J. Compl. Netw. 7 (1), 128–162. grid resilience in South Korea. Complexity 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/
https://doi.org/10.1093/comnet/cny016.
3597010, 2017.
Angst, M., Seppelt, T., 2020. Motifr: Motif Analysis in Multi-Level Networks. -. R package
Elmqvist, T., Andersson, E., McPhearson, T., Bai, X., Bettencourt, L., Brondizio, E., et al.,
version 1.0.0.
2021. Urbanization in and for the anthropocene. npj Urban Sustain. 1 (1) https://
Angst, M., Widmer, A., Fischer, M., Ingold, K., 2018. Connectors and coordinators in
doi.org/10.1038/s42949-021-00018-w.
natural resource governance: insights from Swiss water supply. Ecol. Soc. 23 (2)
Elzen, B., Enserink, B., Smit, W.A., 1996. Socio-technical networks: how a technology
https://doi.org/10.5751/es-10030-230201.
studies approach may help to solve problems related to technical change. Soc. Stud.
Barn gs o, vS e.,
r
nC ao ns cg er .a v Ue r,
b
E a. n, A Pocu l.t o R,
e
M
s.
. 3, 5M (c 1N ),e i 2ll 0, –D 3. 1, .2 h0 t1 tp7 s. :/D /i dg oit ia .ol ri gn /fr 1a 0s .t 1ru 0c 8t 0u /r es and urban Sci. 26 (1), 95–141. https://doi.org/10.1177/030631296026001006.
Finger, M., Groenwegen, J., Künneke, R., 2005. The quest for coherence between
08111146.2016.1235032. institutions and technologies in infrastructure. J. Netw. Ind. 6 (4), 227–260. https://
Benedetti, L., Dirckx, G., Bixio, D., Thoeye, C., Vanrolleghem, P.A., 2008. Environmental
doi.org/10.1177/178359170500600402.
and economic performance assessment of the integrated urban wastewater system.
Fischer, M., Ingold, K., 2020. Networks in Water Governance (Palgrave Studies in Water
J. Environ. Manag. 88 (4), 1262–1272. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
Governance: Policy and Practice). Palgrave Macmillan, Cham.
jenvman.2007.06.020.
Fischer, M., Ingold, K., Sciarini, P., Varone, F., 2012. Impacts of market liberalization on
Berardo, R., Fischer, M., Hamilton, M., 2020. Collaborative governance and the
challenges of network-based research. Am. Rev. Publ. Adm. 50 (8), 898–913. regulatory network: a longitudinal analysis of the Swiss telecommunications sector.
Pol. Stud. J. 40 (3) https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1541-0072.2012.00460.x.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0275074020927792.
Fischer, M., Leifeld, P., 2015. Policy forums: why do they exist and what are they used
Berglund, E.Z., 2015. Using agent-based modeling for water resources planning and for? Pol. Sci. 48, 363–382. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11077-015-9224-y.
management. J. Water Resour. Plann. Manag. 141 (11) https://doi.org/10.1061/
Fischer, M., Sciarini, P., 2016. Drivers of collaboration in political decision making: a
(asce)wr.1943-5452.0000544. cross-sector perspective. J. Polit. 78 (1), 63–74. https://doi.org/10.1086/683061.
Berkes, F., Folke, C., Colding, J., 2000. Linking Social and Ecological Systems:
Freeman, L.C., 1978. Centrality in social networks conceptual clarification. Soc.
Management Practices and Social Mechanisms for Building Resilience. Cambridge Network. 1 (3), 215–239. https://doi.org/10.1016/0378-8733(78)90021-7.
University Press.
Fu, G., Butler, D., Khu, S.-T., 2008. Multiple objective optimal control of integrated urban
Bird, C., Nagappan, N., Gall, H., Murphy, B., Devanbu, P., 2009. Putting it all together: wastewater systems. Environ. Model. Software 23 (2), 225–234. https://doi.org/
using socio-technical networks to predict failures. In: 20th International Symposium
10.1016/j.envsoft.2007.06.003.
on Software Reliability Engineering. https://doi.org/10.1109/ISSRE.2009.17.
Fuenfschilling, L., Truffer, B., 2016. The interplay of institutions, actors and technologies
Bird, R., 1994. Decentralizing Infrastructure: for Good or Ill? Policy Research Working in socio-technical systems — an analysis of transformations in the Australian urban
Pap ¨er Series 1258. The World Bank. water sector. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 103, 298–312. https://doi.org/
Bodin, O., 2017. Collaborative environmental governance: achieving collective action in
10.1016/j.techfore.2015.11.023.
social-ecological systems. Science 357 (6352). https://doi.org/10.1126/science.
Ghaffari, K., Lagzian, M., Kazemi, M., Malekzadeh, G., 2019. A socio-technical analysis of
aan1114.
¨ internet of things development: an interplay of technologies, tasks, structures and
Bodi 2n 0, 1O 9. ., IA mle px ra on vd ine gr, nS e.M tw. o, rB ka g ag pi po r,
o
J a. c, hB ea sr n toe s t,
h
M
e
. sL tu.,
d
B ye ora
f
r cd oo m, R pl. e, xC u som cm iali –n eg c, oG lo.S g. i,
c
e at
l
al., actors. Foresight 21 (6), 640–653. https://doi.org/10.1108/fs-05-2019-0037.
interdependencies. Nat. Sustain. 2 (7), 551–559. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893- Gilar cd oi m, F p. a, r2 a0 ti0 v2 e. eP mol pic iry
i
cc ar le d anib ai ll yit sy
is
a
.
n Jd
.
Ed ue rle
.
g Pa ut bio l.n Pt oo
l
i
.
n 9d e (6p )e ,n 8d 7e 3n –t 8re 9g 3u
.
l ha tt to pr sy
:
/a /g de on ic .oie rs g:
/
a
019-0308-0.
Bodin, O¨ ., Tengo¨, M., 2012. Disentangling intangible social–ecological systems. Global 10.1080/1350176022000046409.
Environ. Change 22 (2), 430–439. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. Gilardi, F., 2009. Delegation in the Regulatory State: Independent Regulatory Agencies in
Western Europe. Edward Elgar Publishing.
gloenvcha.2012.01.005.
Goldthau, A., 2014. Rethinking the governance of energy infrastructure: scale,
Bolo Dgn ise cs li o, sT u. r,
e
P Bfl ii ae sg ee sr
.
, RG e. g, u2 l0 a1 ti9 o.
n
I n &: GTh oe
v
eS rh na ad no cw
e.
hof
t
tS pu s:n /s /h di on ie
.o
R rge /g 1u 0la .1ti 1o 1n 1: /E rx ep gl oa .i 1n 2in 2g
8 6.
decentralization and polycentrism. Energy Res. Social Sci. 1, 134–140. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.erss.2014.02.009.
Bolton, R., Foxon, T.J., 2015. Infrastructure transformation as a socio-technical process
Gonzalez, E.B., Easdale, M.H., Sacchero, D.M., 2021. Socio-technical networks modulate
— implications for the governance of energy distribution networks in the UK.
Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 90, 538–550. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. o An rg-f ea nr tm
in
t ae
.
c Jh .n Ro ulo rg ai
l
c Sa tl
u
i dn .n 8o 3v ,a t 3i 0o –n 3s 6in
.
hw tto po sl
:
/p /r do od iu .oc rt gio /n
1
0o .f
1
0N 1o 6r /th
j.
Patagonia,
techfore.2014.02.017.
jrurstud.2021.02.015.
Callon, M., 1990. Techno-economic networks and irreversibility. Socio. Rev. 38,
132–161. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-954X.1990.tb03351.x.
12

Annexes/Appendices:

Body Text:
JournalofEnvironmentalManagement318(2022)115596
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Environmental Management
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jenvman
Socio-technical networks of infrastructure management: Network concepts
and motifs for studying digitalization, decentralization, and
integrated management
Liliane Mannya,b,*, Mario Angstc, Jo¨ rg Rieckermannb, Manuel Fischerb,d
aInstitute of Civil, Environmental and Geomatic Engineering, ETH Zürich, Stefano-Franscini-Platz 5, 8093, Zürich, Switzerland
bEawag, Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science and Technology, Überlandstrasse 133, 8600, Dübendorf, Switzerland
cDigital Society Initiative, Universita¨t Zürich, Ra¨mistrasse 69, 8001, Zürich, Switzerland
dInstitute of Political Science, University of Bern, Fabrikstrasse 8, 3012, Bern, Switzerland
A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T
Keywords: Networked infrastructure systems — including energy, transportation, water, and wastewater systems — provide
Socio-technical networks essential services to society. Globally, these services are undergoing major transformative processes such as
Multi-level networks digitalization, decentralization, or integrated management. Such processes not only depend on technical changes
Socio-technical relations
in infrastructure systems but also include important social and socio-technical dimensions. In this article, we
Infrastructure management
propose a socio-technical network perspective to study the ensemble of social actors and technical elements
Urban wastewater management
involved in an infrastructure system, and their complex relations. We conceptualize structurally explicit socio-
technical networks of networked infrastructure systems based on methodological considerations from network
analysis and draw on concepts from socio-technical system theories and social-ecological network studies. Based
on these considerations, we suggest analytical methods to study basic network concepts such as density, reci-
procity, and centrality in a socio-technical network. We illustrate socio-technical motifs, i.e., meaningful sub-
structures in socio-technical networks of infrastructure management. Drawing on these, we describe how
infrastructure systems can be analyzed in terms of digitalization, decentralization, and integrated management
from a socio-technical network perspective. Using the example of urban wastewater systems, we illustrate an
empirical application of our approach. The results of an empirical case study in Switzerland demonstrate the
potential of socio-technical networks to promote a deeper understanding of complex socio-technical relations in
networked infrastructure systems. We contend that such a deeper understanding could improve management
practices of infrastructure systems and is becoming even more important for enabling future data-driven,
decentralized, and more integrated infrastructure management.
1. Introduction these challenges and deficits, solutions such as digitalized in-
frastructures (Barns et al., 2017; Zimmerman and Horan, 2004),
Globally, infrastructure systems are facing multiple challenges. De- decentralization of infrastructure systems (R. Bird, 1994; Levaggi et al.,
mographic change, rapidly growing urban areas, and climate change 2018; Libralato et al., 2012), or integrated infrastructure management
affect technical infrastructure systems and their performance in many (Halfawy, 2008; Roelich et al., 2015; Saidi et al., 2018) have been
ways (Wilbanks and Fernandez, 2012; Zimmerman and Faris, 2010). In proposed in the academic and grey literature.
this context, infrastructure systems show several deficits, for example, However, given entrenched and path-dependent systems, both
inefficient operation and management (Roelich et al., 2015), ineffec- technical and social transitions towards these potential solutions are not
tively implemented regulations (Bolognesi and Pflieger, 2019; Sherman easy to achieve (Bolton and Foxon, 2015; Hodson and Marvin, 2010;
et al., 2020), or insufficient evidence of system performance (Benedetti Wihlborg et al., 2019). Any actions, strategies, processes, or policies
et al., 2008; Mugisha, 2007; Oswald et al., 2011). In order to address aiming at addressing challenges, overcoming deficits, and developing
Abbreviations: STN, socio-technical network; UWS, urban wastewater system.
* Corresponding author. Eawag, Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science and Technology, Überlandstrasse 133, 8600, Dübendorf, Switzerland.
E-mail address: liliane.manny@eawag.ch (L. Manny).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2022.115596
Received 16 August 2021; Received in revised form 18 May 2022; Accepted 19 June 2022
Availableonline8July2022
0301-4797/©2022TheAuthors.PublishedbyElsevierLtd.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBYlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
L. Manny et al. J o u r n a l o f E n v i r o n m e n t a l M a n a g e m e n t 318(2022)115596
solutions require an understanding of both social and technical di- corresponding social information exchange network. This is especially
mensions of infrastructures. Accordingly, infrastructure systems have relevant if we consider that the performance outcome of an infrastruc-
been studied from a socio-technical perspective, including social, tech- ture system is dependent on how social and technical subsystems are
nical, and intertwined socio-technical elements (Finger et al., 2005; aligned (i.e., socio-technical fit (Guerrero et al., 2015)).
Ottens et al., 2006). It has been argued that such a holistic analysis of the Third, applying STN to networked infrastructure systems favors
socio-technical nature of infrastructure systems is required in order to systematic analysis, comparability, replicability, and knowledge accu-
improve economic and environmental outcomes (Markolf et al., 2018). mulation between cases of socio-technical systems. It can further serve
The respective literatures have relied on socio-technical system theories as a tool for science-policy exchanges, as barriers or potential gaps in the
(Bolton and Foxon, 2015; de Haan et al., 2013; Fuenfschilling and STN may be illustrated and discussed with relevant stakeholders. As a
Truffer, 2016; Guy et al., 2011; Ottens et al., 2006; Jensen et al., 2015), result, infrastructure management practices and related information
system dynamics approaches (Prouty et al., 2020; Whyte et al., 2020) or exchange among actors could be improved.
agent-based modeling (Berglund, 2015; Dam et al., 2013; Panebianco This article proceeds with a theoretical discussion of socio-technical
and Pahl-Wostl, 2006). systems, related infrastructure trends, and the idea of networks in socio-
Socio-technical systems have further been studied using the concept technical systems. In the third section, the STN approach is formally
of socio-technical networks (STNs) (Elzen et al., 1996; Hu et al., 2010), introduced, and different analytical concepts are proposed. In section
related to a variety of conceptual considerations and different types of four, conceptual considerations are applied to the case of urban waste-
network operationalizations (C. Bird et al., 2009; Kling et al., 2003; water systems. Section five discusses how infrastructure management
Schweber and Harty, 2010). For example, C. Bird et al. (2009) represent and relevant research questions can benefit from the STN approach. The
software component networks as a STN in order to predict software final section concludes that the STN approach is of theoretical, con-
failures. Schweber and Harty (2010) draw on a STN operationalization ceptual, empirical, and practical relevance to the scientific community
to explore the adoption of an innovative technology in the construction as well as to practice.
sector. In the context of networked infrastructure systems, STNs have
often been represented in a structurally implicit or qualitative form 2. Infrastructures as socio-technical systems
(Elzen et al., 1996; Guy et al., 2011; Lamb et al., 2000). Only three
recent studies provide a more structurally explicit approach but lack a 2.1. Analyzing relations between social and technical systems
generic terminology based on network analysis to describe respective
STNs’ operationalizations (Eisenberg et al., 2017; Gonzalez et al., 2021; While technological developments can improve infrastructure sys-
Weerasinghe et al., 2021). tems, their implementation within social structures is often challenging.
This article presents a structurally explicit description and applica- A socio-technical perspective on infrastructure systems comprises two
tion of the STN approach to study interrelated social actors and technical subsystems, a social subsystem and a technical subsystem, and empha-
elements of managing networked infrastructure systems, such as energy, sizes the interdependencies between both subsystems. Socio-technical
transportation, water, or wastewater systems. To do so, we draw on system theories provide generic conceptualizations of socio-technical
concepts from the literature on social-ecological networks (Bodin, 2017; systems that have also been applied in the context of infrastructure
Bodin et al., 2019; Sayles et al., 2019) that we combine with theories of systems. For example, Ottens et al. (2006) point to the importance of
socio-technical systems (Ottens et al., 2006) and related literature. We including rule-like social elements such as regulations, laws, standards,
conceptualize STNs of infrastructure systems as an empirically groun- or culture, into the conceptualization of infrastructures as
ded, quantitative network representation that includes social actors (i.e., socio-technical systems by exploring intelligent transport systems in the
stakeholders) and technical infrastructure elements as network nodes, Netherlands. Focusing on the transformation of Australia’s urban water
and multiple relations in-between these nodes as network edges (social, sector, Fuenfschilling and Truffer (2016) adopt a socio-technical systems
technical, social-technical, and technical-social relations). We apply our perspective by developing the concept of institutional work in the
framing of analyzing socio-technical aspects of infrastructure manage- empirical context of seawater desalination technology. Socio-technical
ment as a STN to the example of urban wastewater systems. Urban system studies tend to be mostly interested in more macro-level socie-
wastewater management is a good application case as it is a strongly tal processes around radical technical change or transitions and seldom
engineering-dominated field that shows slow transformations despite a specify and operationalize the interfaces between technical and social
large number of technical innovations over the last decades (Kiparsky systems at the micro-level.
et al., 2013). Urban wastewater systems have been studied using
socio-technical system perspectives before (de Haan et al., 2013; Jensen 2.2. Digitalization, decentralization, and integrated management of
et al., 2015; Panebianco and Pahl-Wostl, 2006), but not with a struc- infrastructure systems
turally explicit STN approach.
The approach, as discussed in this article, makes several contribu- Among the different types of infrastructure systems, our focus lies on
tions to the literature and addresses related industrial and research gaps. technical infrastructure networks such as energy, transportation, water,
First, analyzing the STN of infrastructure systems can help identify or wastewater systems. Compared to social infrastructures, such as
socio-technical barriers, for example toward digitalization. Barriers can health or education systems, or green infrastructures, technical infra-
be technical (e.g., insufficient data quality (Langeveld et al., 2013) or structure networks are characterized by capital-intensive fixed physical
absent data standards (Eggimann et al., 2017)) or social (e.g., lack of assets, which often have a lifespan of several decades and are func-
vision or resources of relevant actors (Manny et al., 2021)), but also tionally interlinked. Examples of such technical infrastructure networks
socio-technical (Mao et al., 2020), e.g., if data transfer between tech- are power plants, transportation terminals, or (waste) water treatment
nical infrastructure elements and social actors is hindered by ill-defined plants, which are physically connected through power lines, streets,
responsibilities. In this case, STN can provide information about railway lines, and drinking water or sewer pipes.
whether social actors who operate technical elements do also receive Among the most important trends related to these technical infra-
data from these elements. structure systems are digitalization, decentralization, and integrated
Second, the analysis of STN can help to assess how social actors ex- management, which have been previously studied from a social (Barns
change information related to a technical infrastructure system. For et al., 2017; Goldthau, 2014), a technical (Eggimann et al., 2017;
example, a STN analysis can uncover whether the trends of decentral- Libralato et al., 2012), or a socio-technical (Carvalho, 2015; de Haan
ization or integrated management of a technical infrastructure network et al., 2013) perspective. In the following, we briefly describe how a
are reflected in the form of a more decentralized or more integrated conceptualization of infrastructure systems as a STN can help to
2
L. Manny et al. J o u r n a l o f E n v i r o n m e n t a l M a n a g e m e n t 318(2022)115596
disentangle and assess socio-technical complexities underlying all three potentially strong dependencies and interactions among technical ele-
trends. ments. Therefore, the technical elements cannot be operated indepen-
dently from another (Künneke et al., 2010). There has been a trend in
2.2.1. Digitalization both discourse and practice toward an integrated management of
The ongoing trend of digitalization and digital transformation re- infrastructure systems (Hansman et al., 2006; Roelich et al., 2015; Saidi
flects an embedding of digital technologies and evidence-based utiliza- et al., 2018). This trend goes beyond single infrastructure systems.
tion of data and information for managing infrastructure systems (de Recognizing dependencies between different infrastructure systems (e.
Reuver et al., 2016; Kerkez et al., 2016; Zimmerman and Horan, 2004). g., water and energy systems) has resulted in more integrated perspec-
Digital technologies may offer new opportunities due to lower trans- tives such as the water-energy-nexus (Hamiche et al., 2016). Over-
action costs, and thus impacting modes of organization among social coming fragmented organizations would benefit from a better
actors (Künneke et al., 2010). However, the successful implementation understanding of potential relations or even relational barriers that
of digital technologies within infrastructure systems requires both their hinder a more effective, integrated management of infrastructure sys-
actual technical installation and respective social adaptations of the tems. Such an integrated management would incorporate geographical
surrounding social system (Ghaffari et al., 2019). A socio-technical aspects through spatial integration as well as separated sectors through
perspective on digital transformation comprises a relational perspec- horizontal integration.
tive on both social and technical levels at the same time. For example,
technical elements may be equipped with digital technologies, but 2.3. The idea of networks in socio-technical systems
relevant social actors need to have access to data obtained with these
digital technologies in order to make use of it. Recognizing the According to the widespread recognition that technical and social
socio-technical nature of infrastructure systems makes it possible to systems are interdependent, network approaches and concepts have
evaluate the progress of digital transformation in a socio-technical way. been previously used for the analyses of infrastructure systems. For
example, techno-economic networks (Callon, 1990) consider the com-
2.2.2. Decentralization bined dynamics of social and technical change, but focus on a set of
At the technical level, decentralization is an important trend and heterogeneous actors only as network elements, without considering the
potential future solution to address ageing infrastructure, improving technical system as a network. Elzen et al. (1996) introduce the term
sustainability, or the fast and flexible adaptation to demand fluctuations, socio-technical network (STN) to study problems that emerge in the
e.g., related to growing cities or renewable energy. For example, elec- course of technical change using the example of the development of the
tricity supply is complemented by an increasing multiplicity of distrib- European Fighter Aircraft. While they consider structurally explicit ac-
uted generation units that locally feed into the existing distribution tors as nodes of a social network, technical elements are seen rather as
network, thereby enhancing the technical complexity of the electricity technical artifacts that can move between actors (Elzen et al., 1996).
system (Goldthau, 2014). In a similar way, traditional centralized urban Lamb et al. (2000) define STNs as heterogeneous arrangements that
wastewater systems are more and more challenged by decentralized consist of interactions between social units (e.g., individuals, organiza-
technological solutions such as stormwater harvesting or greywater tions, and institutions) and technical units (i.e., technologies). However,
recycling (Larsen et al., 2016; Moglia et al., 2011). The literature implies they do not explicitly operationalize the concept through network
that mixed systems, which are partly (de)centralized, are even more analysis. More applied research was conducted by Eisenberg et al.
complex than either fully centralized or fully decentralized (2017) who investigated the resilience of power grids in South Korea by
infrastructures. analyzing a STN consisting of the power grid as a technical network, as
The increasing complexity of infrastructure systems in their technical well as the social network of power companies and emergency man-
dimensions goes hand in hand with an increasing number of social actors agement headquarters. Their results suggest that response in case of
that participate, challenge, and transform how infrastructure systems blackouts improves if owners and operators of associated power plants
are managed (Elmqvist et al., 2021; Goldthau, 2014). Over the recent are connected to other important stakeholders, e.g., emergency man-
decades, infrastructure systems that were historically vertically inte- agement organizations. Cassidy and Nehorai (2014) use a social
grated monopolies have been increasingly separated into different en- network-based model to analyze smart grid adoption, i.e., a user’s de-
tities in order to allow for competition (Künneke et al., 2010). cision to switch from a conventional energy grid to a smart grid. They
Accordingly, liberalization processes have also multiplied the number determine important influencing factors, e.g., pricing, knowledge, and
and diversity of public and private actors with regulating and density of communities, on the probability of smart grid adoption.
decision-making competencies. Chopra and Khanna (2014) study industrial symbiosis networks and
Exploiting economies of scale, infrastructure systems are expanding their resilience. They use centrality measures, which capture the
and have to be coordinated across a large geographic area involving importance of a node (e.g., water resources or industries) to an overall
different technologies and standards, as well as numerous actors with network, to analyze how vulnerable given nodes in the network are.
different resources and interests (Finger et al., 2005). Additionally, in Their case addresses a water synergy system (across resources, i.e.,
order to coordinate and regulate liberalized infrastructure sectors, reg- across water resources, power plants, and aquatic environment). Most of
ulatory agencies have been introduced as new actors in the course of these examples rather rely on structurally implicit network concepts —
liberalization processes (Fischer et al., 2012; Gilardi, 2002, 2009; without explicitly assessing the entire diversity of relevant nodes and
Thatcher, 2002). With respect to decentralization, new actors on the edges — to study socio-technical systems (Scott and Ulibarri, 2019). In
demand-side have also been joining the traditional supply-side oriented the following, by contrast, we propose structurally explicit network
actor-network. For example, local communities may now autonomously methods in order to systematically connect the social and technical
produce and distribute electricity through their own microgrids (War- systems and analyze them jointly.
neryd et al., 2020).
3. Socio-technical networks of infrastructure management
2.2.3. Integrated management
The management of infrastructure systems is often fragmented into The approach to operationalizing STNs is borrowed from the litera-
different geographical or sectoral systems. The multiplicity of involved ture on social-ecological networks. The concept of social-ecological
actors and organizations requires coordination, collaboration, or infor- networks was introduced in order to conceptualize, operationalize and
mation exchange. Yet, since the components of infrastructures are in one analyze complex interdependencies in social-ecological systems (Bodin
way or another connected through a physical network, there are and Tengo¨, 2012; Bodin et al., 2019). Similar to socio-technical systems,
3
L. Manny et al. J o u r n a l o f E n v i r o n m e n t a l M a n a g e m e n t 318(2022)115596
the social-ecological systems concept posits that understanding the dy- Opposite to the set of social-technical relations (EST), the set of technical-
namics and outcomes of ecological systems needs to take into account social relations ETS contains directed relations from technical elements t
the social system linked to the ecological system, and vice versa (Berkes
to social actors s, thereby
tE→TSs.
We differentiate between EST and ETS
et al., 2000; Ostrom, 2010). The advantage of the network approach is
because these cross-level relations have two conceptually different
that both the ecological system and the social system are assessed
meanings. EST describes directed relations from social actors to technical
through the same lens. The common denominator of network ap-
elements and, therefore, accredits agency to social actors. By contrast,
proaches is that they consist of different components (nodes) that
for ETS we assume that technical elements can provide a certain medium
interact in different ways (edges) (Wasserman and Faust, 1994).
(e.g., data) to social actors. Consequently, the socio-technical edge sets
Furthermore, the network approach provides a shared terminology and
are divided into social-technical and technical-social edges allowing for
a common conceptualization of complex systems such as
different conceptual representations of respective cross-level relations.
social-ecological or socio-technical systems.
If we partition the entire multi-level network based on its edge sets,
we obtain four sub-networks. These represent a unipartite technical
3.1. Formal representation of a socio-technical network (STN)
(GT), a unipartite social (GS), a bipartite social-technical (GST), and a
bipartite technical-social (GTS)network within the entire STN.
We can alternatively describe these networks in a sociometric form if
The proposed STN conceptualization frames social actors as nodes of
we consider their adjacency matrices.1 For example, in the adjacency
a social network and includes technical nodes of an infrastructure sys-
tem. We conceptualize relations between social actors and technical
matrix of GS, the entries esi,sj either take the value 1 (if an edge is
elements at multiple levels: relations among social actors (social-social
present between nodes si and sj) or 0 (if an edge is absent). The adja-
relations), relations among technical elements (technical-technical re- cency matrix entries eti,tj, esi,tj and eti,sj are defined analogously forGT,
lations), and relations among social actors and technical elements and GST, and GTS. In Table 1, we provide an overview of these four networks
vice versa (social-technical and technical-social relations, respectively). and link them individually to previous studies or suggested examples in
The STN representation (s. Fig. 1) considers social-social relations the context of infrastructure systems.
among social actors, e.g., private and public actors responsible for given
infrastructure elements, as well as physical dependencies between 3.2. Socio-technical network (STN) concepts
relevant technical infrastructure elements, e.g., power stations, (waste)
water treatment plants or transportation terminals. Crucially, the Using the formalized description of a STN, we suggest methods to
approach further considers social-technical relations such as compe- analyze the STN of infrastructure management. We label these methods
tencies for operation or ownership, or technical-social relations such as as STN concepts. Drawing on descriptive concepts often used in network
data transfer. Other social-technical or technical-social relations are analysis, we provide adapted concepts that fit the properties of the STN
possible, depending on the infrastructure system under study. structure of infrastructure systems.
The proposed STN represents a multi-level network connecting social The STN concepts are divided into three categories. First, we make
and technical levels. It is, however, not a multi-level network in the use of certain commonly used basic concepts in network analysis and
sense of hierarchically nested social structure (as in multi-level social apply these to STNs. Second, we illustrate the potential of studying
networks; see Lomi et al. (2016)). Instead, our usage of multi-level ter- meaningful sub-structures in a STN. Third, based on the first two cate-
minology in networks that extend beyond social networks uses the term gories, we suggest how the STN of infrastructure management can be
levels to describe different systems, i.e., the social and the technical analyzed in terms of digitalization, decentralization, and integrated
systems. management.
In the following, we present a formal description of our conceptu-
alization of a STN in the context of networked infrastructure systems (s. 3.2.1. Density, reciprocity, and (degree) centrality in a STN
Fig. 2). We define two sets of nodes (also known as ‘vertices’) VT and VS. Table A.1 in Supplementary Materials A presents a comparison of
VT contains technical elements t of an infrastructure system, thus VT = three descriptive concepts, namely density,2 reciprocity,3 and (degree)
{t1, t2, …, tn}. Each social actor s, who is involved in managing the centrality,4 for social networks and adapted to a STN. We consider all
infrastructure system, belongs to the second set VS ={s1, s2,…, sm}. four networks in the STN (s. Table A1) and describe density individually
To fully describe the STN, we additionally define four edge sets. Two for each of them (dS, dT, dST, dTS). The densities of the social and
of these edge sets, ET and ES, are homogenous as edges occur only with technical networks in the STN can be determined, similarly to the social
nodes of the same set, i.e., VT or VS. The two other edge sets, EST and network density, by calculating the ratio of actually present, observed
ETS, are heterogeneous sets, as they comprise cross-level edges between network edges to the number of all possible edges, given the network
nodes from different sets, e.g., edges between nodes of VT and nodes of nodes. For the cross-level social-technical and technical-social networks
VS. (GST and GTS), we need to include both technical nodes |VT|as well as
ET contains all technically given connections between technical el- social nodes |VS| in the denominator to calculate the number of all
ements t, i.e., it forms a technical network. Thus, ET represents the set of possible edges between technical elements and social actors (s.
edges between pairs of nodes of VT. In the same way, ES contains re- Table A1).
lations between social actors s, i.e., between pairs of nodes of VS. Here, For the concept of reciprocity, we specify two equations. The first
it is assumed that technical-technical relations (ET) are directed, i.e., go
from one technical element to the other. Infrastructure systems often
transport a medium (e.g., water, wastewater, energy) into one direction, 1 An adjacency matrix of a network is a square matrix where the matrix en-
that is, from one technical node to the next. However, ET can also be tries indicate whether two nodes are adjacent (i.e., connected) or not (Was-
conceived of as undirected, e.g., in the case of transportation systems serman and Faust, 1994).
where technical edges would describe traffic between two nodes, inde- 2 Density refers to the ratio of edges that are actually present in a network to
pendently of the direction of the traffic. Social-social relations (ES) can the maximum number of edges that are possible given the number of nodes
take either directed (for example measuring the exchange of information (Wasserman and Faust, 1994) (s. also Table A1).
between actors) or undirected (such as collaboration between actors) 3 Reciprocity describes that a directed edge from node A to node B is recip-
rocated, so there is a directed edge from node B to node A as well.
forms.
4 Centrality is best described for an individual node that is central in the
EST contains directed relations between social actors s and technical
network. In the case of degree centrality, a (degree) central node has a high
elements t. Note that for set EST the direction is defined from s to t
(sE→STt).
number of (in-coming and out-going) edges.
4
L. Manny et al. J o u r n a l o f E n v i r o n m e n t a l M a n a g e m e n t 318(2022)115596
Fig. 1. Socio-technical network consisting of social actors at the social level and technical infrastructure elements at the technical level and multiple relations
in between.
Fig. 2. Representation of a socio-technical network (STN) as a multi-level network.
socio-technical perspective. With the term socio-technical reciprocity
Table 1
Four networks (GT,GS,GST,GTS) within the socio-technical network (STN).
we refer to a social-technical edge esi,tj between two nodes si and tj that
is also present in the technical-social network (etj,si). Reciprocity can be
Networks within the STN Previous studies and suggested examples for
assessed for a pair of nodes or for the entire network. For the latter, we
infrastructure systems
summarize all observed reciprocated socio-technical relations
GT = ET( )VT, T nee tc whn oi rc ka l -
e
-
tE
W
ale al.c
t
et 2r r0i c d1a
i8
sl
)
ti rn ibfr ua ts it or nu c st yu sr te
e
mne
s
t (w Do ur nk ns a(A ndk soy ( te|E cS hT n↔ icaE l-T sS o|)
c
iaa ln d
e
dd gi ev si d (e
|
Eb TSy
| )
th toe dsu em
te
rmof
i
ns eo c ti ha el- te soch cin oi -c ta el
c
h( n|E icS aT| l) ra en cid
-
Wilkinson 2013) procity rst.
- Infrastructure systems in general (Dunn et al. (Degree) centrality is an important concept that serves for the
2013) identification of central nodes (Wasserman and Faust, 1994). In a STN,
GS = (VS, Social network - Information exchange (Haythornthwaite
central nodes can be central technical elements or central social actors. If
ES) 1996; Leifeld and Schneider 2012)
central nodes have a high number of edges, they are considered to be
- Collaboration (Angst et al. 2018; Lienert et al.
2013) degree central. Degree centrality can be either defined by looking at
- Financial transactions (Pan et al. 2020) social or technical edges or at cross-level social-technical or
GST = (VS, Social-technical - Ownership technical-social edges. Further, the degree centrality can be calculated
VT,EST) network - Operation
for in-coming edges, i.e., edges directed towards a node (in-degree
- Financial responsibility
GTS = (VT, Technical-social - Data transfer centrality cD(cid:0) ), or for out-going edges, i.e., edges directed away from a
VS,ETS) network node (out-degree centrality cD+), or both (degree centrality cD).
Taking the social-technical network (GST) as an example, the concept
of degree centrality can help determine whether a social actor is related
equation concerns reciprocity in the social network GS, i.e., social-social
to many technical elements (social-technical out-degree centrality
relations that are reciprocated between two social actors. The second
equation reflects our conceptual understanding of reciprocity from a
CS DT +(si)). Considering the opposing direction of edges in the technical-
5
L. Manny et al. J o u r n a l o f E n v i r o n m e n t a l M a n a g e m e n t 318(2022)115596
social network (GTS), we can find out similar circumstances, i.e., a 3.2.3. STNs and digitalization, decentralization, and integrated
technical element being related to either a single, to few or to many management of infrastructures
social actors (technical-social out-degree centrality CT DS +(ti)). Based on the descriptive concepts in Table A1 and the socio-technical
The equations for degree centrality as presented in the respective motifs in Table 2, we provide interpretations of entire STN structures
column in Table A1 allow for the identification of central social actors related to the trends of digitalization, decentralization, and integrated
and central technical elements in a STN. management in Table C1 in Supplementary Materials C.
In Table C1, we illustrate exemplary STN configurations and suggest
3.2.2. Socio-technical motifs mathematical equations to determine the degrees of digitalization,
Besides studying individual nodes or pairs of nodes (i.e., so-called decentralization, and integrated management from a STN perspective.
dyads), we illustrate the potential of studying meaningful sub- For example, an infrastructure system can be either socio-technical
structures with three nodes (i.e., triads) and with four nodes (i.e., cy- digital or not socio-technical digital or somewhere in-between. In the
cles) in Table 2. Adapting terminology from social-ecological network same way, an infrastructure system can be rather centralized or more
theory (Bodin et al., 2019), we label these sub-structures “socio-- decentralized. By considering social-social relations as well as social-
technical motifs” and provide respective socio-technical interpretations technical relations, we can further determine whether an infrastruc-
(s. Table 2). These socio-technical motifs include one technical element ture system is managed in a fragmented or integrated way. Overall, the
and two social actors in the case of socio-technical triads or two tech- proposed equations may prove useful for comparing different STNs of
nical elements and two social actors for socio-technical cycles. The il- infrastructure management in an analytical and formal way.
lustrations of socio-technical motifs in Table 2 demonstrate that
multiple relations are taken into account as well. 4. Application to the management of urban wastewater systems
For example, motif A or “socio-technical alignment with recipro-
cated social-social relation” represents a sub-structure where social ac- We take urban wastewater systems (UWS) as our case study to
tors interact with reciprocating social actors who are related to technical demonstrate the applicability of the STN approach. We do so by out-
elements (or vice versa) which are connected at the technical level. This lining the social and technical characteristics of UWS and describing
socio-technical cycle takes into account three types of edges: the tech- how they can be studied from a STN perspective. We then provide a
nical, the social, and either the social-technical or the technical-social. concrete operationalization of nodes and edges that is guided by a
Motifs B and C differ from motif A in the form of social edges, as motif visualization. Based on our operationalization choices, we designed an
A includes reciprocated social-social relations between social actors, and empirical case study of a regional unit of an UWS in Switzerland and
motifs B and C do not feature this reciprocity. Motif D represents a socio- collected STN data through a context interview, document analysis, and
technical triad, where two social actors are related to the same technical a survey. Using the obtained case study data, we apply selected STN
element. Table 2 shows four selected simple socio-technical motifs out of concepts from Tables A1, 2 and C.1, and conduct a preliminary analysis
a number of potential further examples as presented in Supplementary and interpretation of respective descriptive results. Our empirical
Materials B. application of STN is guided by the general research question: “What is
The conceptual objective of socio-technical motifs is to analyze them the structure of a STN in urban wastewater systems and how can
descriptively, i.e., by counting the number of observed motifs in a STN. knowledge about this structure inform researchers and practitioners
Socio-technical motifs can also be interpreted in a normative way, e.g., about governance and infrastructure challenges?”
by assuming that the presence of numerous motifs A, B and C in a STN
implies a well-functioning infrastructure management from a STN
4.1. Empirical case study: technical elements and social actors in Swiss
perspective.
UWS management
Centralized UWS consist of multiple technical elements that are
Table 2
Selected socio-technical motifs within socio-technical networks.
Motif Motif description Motif representations Socio-technical interpretation
Cross-level edges represent Cross-level edges represent
social-technical relations (e.g., technical-social relations (e.
operation/ownership) g., data transfer)
A Socio-technical alignment with Tendency of social actors to interact with reciprocating
reciprocated social-social relation (socio- social actors who are related to technical elements (or
technical cycle) vice versa) which are connected at the technical level
B Socio-technical alignment with same Tendency of social actors to interact with social actors
direction of social-social and technical- who are related to technical elements (or vice versa)
technical relations (socio-technical cycle) which are connected at the technical level
(social-social relation has same direction as technical-
technical relation)
C Socio-technical alignment with opposing Tendency of social actors to interact with social actors
direction of social-social and technical- who are related to technical elements (or vice versa)
technical relations (socio-technical cycle) which are connected at the technical level
(social-social relation has opposite direction as technical-
technical relation)
D Socio-technical transitive closure (socio- Tendency of social actors to interact with reciprocating
technical triad) social actors who are related to the same technical
element
Note: Circles denote social actors and squares denote technical elements. Lines denote social-social relations, technical-technical relations, social-technical relations
and technical-social relations.
6
L. Manny et al. J o u r n a l o f E n v i r o n m e n t a l M a n a g e m e n t 318(2022)115596
arranged in a way that stormwater is drained from impervious city areas, ments in the catchment area were added based on a check of all websites
and wastewater from individual households is directed to a wastewater from municipalities active within the catchment area as well as available
treatment plant (WWTP). The WWTP discharges the treated water into planning documents. The resulting list of social actors was then again
nearby surface waters, e.g., creeks, rivers, or lakes. validated by the context interviewee and can be found together with the
At the social level, many different actors and organizations are list of all technical elements included in the analysis in Supplementary
involved in the management of UWS, e.g., operators, planners, and Materials E. With respect to the system boundaries, we represent tech-
authorities (Lienert et al., 2013). Yet, organizational fragmentation may nical elements of a WWTP and its main trunk sewer. For the latter, we
result in inefficient operation and management (Roelich et al., 2015; consider the following technical elements: combined sewer overflows
Worthington, 2014), absence of system-wide performance assessment (CSO), and CSO tanks (CSO T), as well as pumping stations (P). The
(Benedetti et al., 2008; Fu et al., 2008), slow innovation (Kiparsky et al., representation excludes the rest of the collection system and minor el-
2013), or even negative environmental impacts in the long run (Kim ements such as manholes. The technical elements are chosen based on
et al., 2015). their relevance to the investigated infrastructure trends and three con-
The example of UWS illustrates the importance of socio-technical siderations. First, they are equitable with digital technologies, which
dependencies, as socio-technical configurations can influence the tech- potentially transfer data to social actors. Second, they are important
nical performance of an infrastructure system. Such dependencies elements in terms of urban wastewater management and water protec-
become especially relevant when it comes to changes at the technical or tion. Third, they need to be actively operated, planned, and monitored
socio-technical level. Examples are the integration of digital technolo- by social actors. The correct representation of the technical network GT
gies (e.g., sensors) within existing infrastructure systems (i.e., digitali- consisting of the technical elements and the technical-technical relations
zation), transitions towards more decentralized infrastructure systems was validated by the key stakeholder with whom we conducted the
(i.e., decentralization), or more system-wide management of regional context interview and a representative of the authority.
system units (i.e., integrated management). When it comes to the system boundaries for the social network, we
In Switzerland, UWS are managed by public entities such as mu- focus on the organizational level. Our case study UWS is owned and
nicipalities or wastewater associations.5 Most of the regulative and ex- operated by public entities, i.e., by six municipalities. Social actors have
ecutive competencies are situated at the sub-state level and provided by one of the following roles: WWTP operator, wastewater association
public administrations (Luís-Manso, 2005). While the trends of decen- president, municipal president, municipal council, municipal adminis-
tralization and integrated management are currently on the agenda of tration, municipal works, engineer, or authority. In other cases, social
the national Swiss wastewater association, they are only sporadically actors should be selected based on their relevance to managing technical
addressed and implemented in practice (Lienert et al., 2006). In terms of elements of an infrastructure system. There are different ways to oper-
digitalization, the 26 sub-states are in different stages, with the sub-state ationalize social-social edges in a STN, depending on the aspects of
Zurich being rather advanced, for example (Manny et al., 2021). infrastructure management that researchers decide to analyze, such as
Our case study UWS is located in the sub-state Zurich,6 thereby collaboration (Angst et al., 2018; Lienert et al., 2013) or financial
representing one out of 62 UWS in the entire sub-state area. The case transactions (Pan et al., 2020) (s. also Table 1). In our case study UWS,
study UWS was chosen based on two considerations. First, the catch- we rely on an explicit operationalization of relations in the STN. All four
ment area of the case study UWS includes six municipalities with their types of relations are deduced based on their representativeness related
respective technical elements, which are connected to the central to the three trends of digitalization, decentralization, and integrated
WWTP. Based on a survey conducted in 2017 (Manny et al., 2018), we management. We define social-social relations between social actors as
identified a median of 6 municipalities per wastewater association in information exchange (Haythornthwaite, 1996; Leifeld and Schneider,
Switzerland. Therefore, the selected case study UWS is comparative to 2012) and technical-technical relations as technical connections in the
many other UWS in terms of its size. Second, the region where the case form of physical dependencies (Aksoy et al., 2018; Dunn and Wilkinson,
study UWS is located reflects a typical Swiss peri-urban region. In total, 2013). Social-technical relations are represented as operation, i.e., the
around 28′000 inhabitants are connected to the WWTP of the catchment competence to operate technical elements. This operationalization al-
area. A first impression of the area, the systems’ technical elements, and lows us to study the trends of decentralization and integrated manage-
social actors was achieved by conducting a context interview with a key ment. Technical-social relations describe data transfer from a technical
stakeholder that had a broad knowledge of the case in June 2020. Based element to a social actor, thus providing socio-technical information on
on the context interview, we classify the empirical case study UWS as the trend of digitalization. In order to illustrate our STN operationali-
rather not advanced in terms of digitalization, decentralization, and zation, we provide a visualization in the form of a simple example — not
integrated management. based on any empirical data — in Fig. 3.
Using an online survey, we gathered STN data from March to May
2021 with a response rate of 97 percent (31 out of 32 social actors
4.2. STN operationalization and data collection
represented). The obtained STN dataset contains data on technical ele-
ments and social actors as well as relational data on information ex-
Drawing on the context interview and complementary document
change, operation, and data transfer. For example, we provided survey
analysis, we identified all relevant technical elements, the technical-
participants with a list of social actors who are active in the case study
technical relations, and all social actors who are involved in the man-
area and asked them with whom they were exchanging information on
agement of the UWS. We used a technical infrastructure map of the UWS
urban water management issues during the past two years.7 Survey
given to us by the context interviewee to identify technical elements and
participants were allowed to identify up to ten additional actors with
technical connections (i.e., technical-technical relations). The context
whom they exchange information. However, only at most two additional
interviewee also provided us with information on all municipalities,
social actors were added by survey participants. Therefore, we decided
engineers, and authority representatives involved in managing the UWS.
to exclude these additionally stated actors as each name was only
Additional social actors relevant to the management of technical ele-
mentioned once. We assume that additionally stated actors are rather
personal contacts and not relevant for all social actors in the catchment
5 A wastewater association is an organizational form of inter-municipal area in terms of information exchange.
cooperation where several municipalities join forces to operate technical ele-
ments of the UWS.
6 We refrain from presenting the actual location to protect the anonymity of 7 We provide a complete version of the survey questionnaire in Supplemen-
social actors. tary Materials D.
7
L. Manny et al. J o u r n a l o f E n v i r o n m e n t a l M a n a g e m e n t 318(2022)115596
Fig. 3. Operationalization of a simple example of a socio-technical network (STN) of an urban wastewater system (UWS).
All relational data was converted to matrix format in order to apply — as compared to higher densities in networks related to an established
network analysis tools.8 For the purpose of reproducibility, we give a issue such as urban wastewater management. These exemplary com-
more detailed description on STN data collection and data analysis in parisons with published network studies validate the structure of our
Supplementary Materials F. Based on the network matrices, we visualize social network in terms of one of the most basic and important network
the empirical STN of the case study UWS in Fig. 4.9 The figure reflects an indicators, i.e., network density.
empirical observation in network format, assessed based on empirical At the socio-technical level, the densities of the operation and data
information from a context interview, document analysis, and a survey. transfer networks are generally dependent on the number of social ac-
The empirical STN consists of 31 social actors and 42 technical elements. tors and technical elements. The social-technical network of operation
In total, there are 285 information exchange edges, 41 technical shows a higher density (dST=0.19)than the technical-social network of
connection edges, 249 operation edges, and 7 data transfer edges (s. data transfer (dTS = 0.005). We assume that theoretically, it is more
Table 3). likely that a single social actor operates many technical elements and
that data transfer rather occurs from one technical element to a few
4.3. Descriptive results from the STN analysis specific social actors than to all. This likely explains the observation in
the empirical STN that the density of the operation network is higher
In the following, we present results that reflect a selection of our than the density of the data transfer network.
suggested descriptive STN concepts in section 3.2. Based on the number With respect to reciprocity, we determine both the reciprocity within
of social actors and technical elements as well as the number of different the social network rS=0.6 and the socio-technical reciprocity rst =
edges, we determine the densities of the four networks GS, GT, GST, and 0.005. The latter is very low due to the minor presence of only seven
GTS (s. Table 3). The density of the social information exchange network data transfer edges, i.e., only a few social actors who operate technical
is 0.31. This value is in line with what we observe in similar networks. elements receive data from them. More advancement in digitalization
For example, the densities of collaboration networks among actors being could result in higher socio-technical reciprocity, where ideally, data
involved in 11 policy processes on the Swiss national level range from from technical elements would be available to those social actors
0.27 to 0.43, with most values being right above or below 0.30 (Fischer operating them. Further, the social reciprocity rS=0.6 indicates that
and Sciarini, 2016). In information exchange networks on hydraulic some information exchange edges are reciprocated while others remain
fracturing politics in Swiss sub-states, information exchange network one-way forms of information “forwarding”. This is interesting as social
densities range between 0.11 and 0.20 (Ingold and Fischer, 2016). actors have different roles (e.g., municipal administration, engineer,
Indeed, we would expect to see lower density values for networks authority) that include organizational hierarchies and, therefore, may
dealing with hydraulic fracturing — a new issue on the political agenda also compromise forms of one-way reporting instead of reciprocal in-
formation exchange.
8 Data on social and technical nodes can be found in Supplementary Materials
E. The analysis of the STN was performed in R studio using, for example, the
packages graphlayouts (Schoch, 2020) and motifr (Angst and Seppelt, 2020).
9 While Fig. 3 illustrates a simple example not based on any empirical data of
our representation of the nodes and edges of a STN (i.e. including a technical
infrastructure map and respective symbols of technical elements and social
actors), Fig. 4 is based on empirically validated information and visualizes the
empirical STN of a real-world UWS.
8
L. Manny et al. J o u r n a l o f E n v i r o n m e n t a l M a n a g e m e n t 318(2022)115596
Fig. 4. Socio-technical network (STN) of an urban wastewater system (UWS) in Switzerland. Social actors are at the top, technical elements are at the lower level and
colored based on their affiliation to a municipality. Information exchange edges are blue, technical connection edges are red, operation and data transfer edges are
both colored grey. This STN was visualized using graphlayouts (Schoch, 2020) in R studio. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the
reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)
Based on the determination of degree centrality10, the empirical STN UWS. In terms of data transfer, CSO tank 1 is the most degree central
study reveals that the municipal council representative 2 of municipality technical element, as data is transferred to the maximum number of four
1 who also has the role of the president of the wastewater association is social actors.
most degree central11 in the information exchange network, i.e., ex- For the operation network, we counted 754 socio-technical motifs A
changes information with most other social actors (degree centrality: 39 (socio-technical cycle) and 366 socio-technical motifs D (socio-technical
edges). We further identify two degree central social actors12 in terms of triad). The quantitative assessment is more informative if multiple
operation: the WWTP operator as well as the municipal council repre- different empirical STNs are compared, which is out of the scope of this
sentative 2 of municipality 1 (i.e., the president of the wastewater as- article. However, looking at particular socio-technical motifs within the
sociation). These two social actors are degree central in the sense that STN allows for a more qualitative identification of social actors or
they are involved in the operation of the highest number of technical technical elements that are in fact part of such motifs. For example, most
elements (in total 38 out of 42 technical elements). This implies that of the appearances of socio-technical motif A in the operation network
they are critical social actors for the entire operation of the case study include the municipal council representative 2 of municipality 1 (i.e.,
the president of the wastewater association) (part of 150 socio-technical
motifs A) and the WWTP operator (part of 125 socio-technical motifs A)
(s. Table H.1 in Supplementary Materials H).
10 Besides degree centrality, several different centrality parameters can be By contrast, social actors and technical elements that are not part of
applied to evaluate the importance of a network node, for example, between- such motifs can be determined, which would be useful to detect certain
ness, closeness or eigenvector centrality (Freeman, 1978). Here, we base our governance gaps or misfits (Angst and Seppelt, 2020). Relating to
interpretation on degree centrality. However, we provide additional results for socio-technical motif A in the operation network for example, we
betweenness, closeness, and eigenvector centrality in the social network in
identified 453 configurations, where two social actors who operate two
Supplementary Materials G along with information on in- and out-degree
connected technical elements do not exchange information. In
centrality.
11 Here, degree central social actors in the information exchange network are Table H.1, we determine a ratio of socio-technical motifs A where social
actors do not exchange information (i.e., “open socio-technical cycles”)
those social actors that show the highest count of in-coming and out-going
information exchange edges (social-social relations). Degree central social ac- to socio-technical motifs where social actors do exchange information (i.
tors are those who exchange information with most other social actors and e., “closed socio-technical cycles”) in the operation network. Based on
many social actors indicated that they exchange information with them (s. also the ratio values for each social actor, we found that particularly two
Table A1 for the differentiation between in-degree (in-coming edges for a node) engineers and three municipal works representatives should exchange
and out-degree (out-going edges from a node) centralities. Degree centrality is information with more social actors. For example, in order to close the
the sum of in- and out-degree centralities for a node. socio-technical cycle, the municipal works representative of munici-
12 We base our interpretation of central social actors for the operation of the pality 4 should exchange information with engineer 3.
UWS on degree centrality, while other centrality parameters could be relevant
With respect to the social-technical motifs D (socio-technical triads)
as well (s. also footnote 10 and Supplementary Materials G).
9
L. Manny et al. J o u r n a l o f E n v i r o n m e n t a l M a n a g e m e n t 318(2022)115596
Table 3 by comparing the density value to observations in similar studies. Social
Socio-technical network analysis of the empirical STN as visualized in Fig. 4. and technical nodes of the social-technical and technical-social networks
Concept Description Result were validated as they are part of the social and technical networks. In
order to validate edges in the social-technical operation network, we
|| VV TS|
|
N Nu um mb be er
r
oo ff ts eo cc hia nl
i
ca ac lt o er ls
e ments
43 21
checked whether operation edges between social actors from different
|ES| Number of social-social relations 285 municipalities and technical elements associated with these municipal-
(here: information exchange) ities were present. For example, we tested whether technical elements
|ET| Number of technical-technical 41 owned by municipality 1 showed social-technical edges to social actors
relations (here: technical connection)
affiliated with municipality 1. Analogously, we examined all munici-
|EST| Number of social-technical 249
relations (here: operation) palities and found that each municipality was represented and operation
|ETS| Number of technical-social 7 edges were present for all technical elements owned by the respective
relations (here: data transfer) municipality. The technical-social data transfer edges were validated
dS Social network density (directed) 0.31 based on information about technical elements that are equipped with a
(information exchange density)
sensor (in total 3 technical elements) and that, therefore, can potentially
dT Technical network density 0.05
(undirected) transfer data. We observed that those technical elements that are
dST Social-technical network density 0.19 equipped with a sensor (i.e., the WWTP, CSO tank 1, and CSO tank 13)
(operation network density) transfer data to at least one social actor, validating the technical-social
dTS Technical-social network density 0.005
edges.
(data transfer network density)
rS Social network reciprocity 0.6 A further issue related to validation is missing data. Indeed, missing
rst Socio-technical reciprocity 0.005 data is an extremely common problem with surveys and can have an
max(CS DT+) Most central social actor(s) based WWTP operator; municipal influence on the correct representation of the network (Berardo et al.,
on social-technical network (central council 2 of municipality 1 (i.e., 2020). Yet, in our case, we have an exceptionally high survey response
in terms of operation of technical wastewater association
rate of 97 percent, i.e., only one actor did not respond to our survey (a
elements) president)
max(CS DT+) Most central technical element CSO tank 1 second WWTP operator for the same WWTP).
based on technical-social network Two additional strategies could contribute both to the validation of
(central in terms of data transfer to the STN as well as to more in-depth analytical insights. First, the analysis
social actors)
could benefit from quantitative results being combined with more
motif A Count of socio-technical motif A 754
qualitative insights, deriving, namely, from context interviews. For
(socio-technical cycle)
Count of socio-technical motif A 453 example, the interviewee stated that “most infrastructure elements are
without social-social relations not equipped with sensors” and consequently cannot transfer data to
motif D Count of socio-technical motif D 366 social actors. In addition, the interviewee tried to bring social actors
(socio-technical triad) together to “sensitize them to an integrated management of the entire
ddigital S do igc ii to a- lt ie zc ah tin oi nc al degree of 0.41
urban wastewater system”, which suggests that the system is still
ddecentral Socio-technical degree of 0.1 managed in a fragmented way. A quantitative analysis based on the STN
decentralization concepts might inform stakeholders about where such fragmentation
dintegrated Socio-technical degree of 0.24
still exists, and how it might be addressed.
integrated management
Second, comparing the case study UWS to other empirical STNs
could provide benefits in terms of validation as well as additional in-
sights. In terms of validation, we were only able to compare the structure
of our networks to other networks from other sectors, but not to UWS
in the operation network, we identified information exchange gaps be-
networks in other cases. As for additional insights, for example, different
tween the municipal council representative 1 of municipality 1 and the
network densities in different cases, or different actors that take central
WWTP operator as well as the municipal works representative of mu-
roles, might enable us to better grasp why different systems differ in
nicipality 1. Further, by exchanging information with the WWTP oper-
their performance or adaptation capacity.
ator as well as the municipal council representative of municipality 2,
Our STN analysis has provided accurate findings on the challenges in
engineer 5 could bridge important information exchange gaps.
existing UWS. For example, we identified municipal council represen-
Finally, the determined degrees of digitalization, decentralization,
tative 2 of municipality 1 (i.e., the president of the wastewater associ-
and integrated management demonstrate that the case study UWS can
be seen as rather not socio-technical digital (ddigital = 0.41), socio- ation) and the WWTP operator as central social actors either in terms of
technical centralized (ddecentral = 0.1), and managed in a fragmented information exchange or operation. This finding emphasizes that
way (dintegrated = 0.24). The value interval for all three degrees is be- different social actors play important roles depending on their social and
socio-technical relations. Such a finding accurately represents the
tween 0 and 1, where values close to 1 imply socio-technical digital,
functioning of Swiss local governance, where public, semi-private, and
socio-technical decentralized, or integrated management (s. also Sup-
private actors collaborate and jointly fulfill functions related to the
plementary Materials C).
management, development, implementation, and innovation within
infrastructure systems. Systematic knowledge about these roles can be
5. Discussion
crucial to understanding the functioning of an UWS and its capacity for
transformation in light of trends such as digitalization, decentralization,
The analysis of the case study UWS demonstrates the applicability of
or integrated management. Also, in our empirical illustration, we
the STN approach to empirical cases and illustrates the use of network
counted 754 configurations of the socio-technical motif A where recip-
concepts such as density, reciprocity, and (degree) centrality. STNs are a
rocal information exchange is present compared to 453 of the same
useful approach if the findings are valid and accurate. Regarding val-
configuration with absent information exchange edges. The latter
idity, we have discussed that a STN should be validated depending on
configuration describes a form of governance gap or socio-technical
the operationalization of network nodes and edges, most easily based on
misfit that could be resolved by supporting the formation of informa-
separate validation approaches for different parts of the STN. In this
tion exchange edges between identified social actors. Again, this finding
article, two experts confirmed the correct representation of the technical
accurately represents the empirical reality where some actors have long-
network. The structure of the social information network was validated
established and trustful relations, while others lack these relations due
10
L. Manny et al. J o u r n a l o f E n v i r o n m e n t a l M a n a g e m e n t 318(2022)115596
to different system understandings (Herzog and Ingold, 2019), different practical relevance. First, STNs combine insights from several theoret-
policy preferences and values (Metz et al., 2019), or sectoral or ical strands within social sciences as well as interdisciplinary literature
administrative boundaries (Fischer and Ingold, 2020; Fischer and on infrastructure management and beyond. More specifically, studies on
Sciarini, 2016). digitalization (Barns et al., 2017; Zimmerman and Horan, 2004),
Even though UWS have been previously studied from socio-technical decentralization (R. Bird, 1994; Levaggi et al., 2018; Libralato et al.,
system perspectives (de Haan et al., 2013; Jensen et al., 2015; Pan- 2012), integrated management (Halfawy, 2008; Roelich et al., 2015;
ebianco and Pahl-Wostl, 2006), we have demonstrated that a STN Saidi et al., 2018), among others, will benefit from this approach as it
approach reveals relevant insights as interrelated technical elements and provides them with a systematic and formalized tool for analysis. Based
social actors are jointly analyzed based on detailed empirical informa- on this tool, answers to important questions about socio-technical fit
tion on each social and technical node, and different edges between within infrastructure systems, or around central social actors or tech-
these nodes. Compared to system dynamics (Prouty et al., 2020; Whyte nical elements, as discussed above, can be explored. Second, STNs are of
et al., 2020) or agent-based modeling (Berglund, 2015; Dam et al., 2013; conceptual relevance as we propose a structurally explicit operational-
Panebianco and Pahl-Wostl, 2006; Williams, 2018) approaches, STNs do ization of the concept of STN in the context of infrastructure systems.
not capture dynamic changes, but create a conceptual and methodo- The concept is not new to the literature (Elzen et al., 1996), but the
logical basis to achieve a deeper understanding of socio-technical actual network has mostly been dealt with implicitly, without oper-
infrastructure systems. ationalizing each network node and edge (Kluger et al., 2020; Scott and
First, researchers working with a STN approach could ask questions Ulibarri, 2019). Third, STNs are of empirical relevance as they allow for
about central social actors or central technical elements. This could be a detailed analysis of the functioning of specific infrastructure systems,
important for understanding which technical elements are most crucial as well as propositions on how to adapt those systems and induce
for integrated management (as they, e.g., connect different parts of the transformations in order to adapt to challenging and dynamic contexts,
STN), or which social actors could play an important role in pushing for example, related to digitalization, decentralization, or integrated
towards decentralization or digitalization (Hoolohan et al., 2021; Mer- management. Fourth, STNs have a high potential for practical relevance.
gel et al., 2019). A question allowing for a more detailed analytical Not only does stakeholder knowledge provide crucial information for
insight into infrastructure systems would ask whether the STN is highly assessing the different nodes and edges, but the resulting networks could
fragmented, or whether it is well integrated (s. Table C1). This infor- be used as a tool for discussion with stakeholders. For example, dis-
mation again could provide hints on where more efforts towards inte- cussions could focus on whether they perceive the interdependencies
grated infrastructure management might be needed. similar to those represented in the STN, or whether STNs allow stake-
Second, a STN approach could help to identify social or socio- holders to identify potential governance gaps or misfits (Angst and
technical barriers toward digitalization, decentralization, or integrated Seppelt, 2020). A STN of infrastructure systems is thus also a potential
management of infrastructure systems (Manny et al., 2021). For tool to be used in stakeholder interactions and could be beneficial in
example, related to digitalization, even though digital technologies are instances of science-policy exchange (Cvitanovic et al., 2016).
already available, barriers may hinder their adoption if the social system The STN approach as presented in this article relies on a few as-
is lagging behind in developing and implementing fitting forms of co- sumptions that, if modified, would change the structure of the network
ordination, cooperation, or collaboration (Guy et al., 2011; Marchant as well as findings. First, we assume that any ecological and natural
et al., 2013). By coupling social and technical systems, data and infor- elements of the environment are not part of the STN. Indeed, including
mation flows between technical elements and social actors can be these elements would increase the network complexity. However, in
studied in combination. future studies, the environment could be included within an even more
Third, in terms of the entire infrastructure performance, the litera- holistic “social-ecological-technological network”, as infrastructures
ture has emphasized critical transactions essential for the functioning of have been considered as social, ecological, and technological systems
infrastructures (Künneke et al., 2010). The successful restructuring of (Markolf et al., 2018). Such an extended approach could be useful for
infrastructures requires the capacity to align technical functions and explicitly addressing innovative concepts such as blue-green infra-
modes of organization. Identifying critical transactions, such as relevant structure (Dai et al., 2021; Donati et al., 2022; Thorne et al., 2018) and
information exchange relations between social actors, could be sup- nature-based solutions (Cohen-Shacham et al., 2016). Second, we as-
ported by the idea of socio-technical fit. This would be achieved if sume that only social actors are part of the social side of the
important connections at the technical level are aligned with respective socio-technical systems, but we disregard important other social ele-
connections at the social level, as illustrated with the example of two ments such as institutions or forums (Fischer and Leifeld, 2015) that
social actors, who are responsible for two technically connected tech- could support the coordination among actors, or ideas and discursive
nical elements and exchange information (s. socio-technical motif A in elements (Heiberg et al., 2022). In addition, our operationalization re-
Table 2). lies on a single representation of social-social relations in the form of
Finally, infrastructure trends such as digitalization, decentralization, information exchange, however, other types of relations, such as
or integrated management require the implementation of policy in- collaboration (Angst et al., 2018) or financial transactions (Pan et al.,
struments (Soutar, 2021). However, identifying the right policy in- 2020) could be included as well. Taking these elements and relations
struments involves complex decisions. Understanding the relations into account could provide additional insights into how coordination
among social and technical levels at the micro-level of their individual within a STN works, and provide different results with respect to central
elements, potential opportunities for action may become transparent actors. Third, we assume that our conceptualization of a STN as a
(Prager and Pfeifer, 2015). A STN approach might thus help to identify “snapshot” view of data gathered at one point in time indicates a real-
fitting policy instruments by specifying how these act on different istic representation of a socio-technical system that in reality is dynamic,
related technical and social elements, such as e.g., actor coordination, in with different elements of the network dynamically changing and
infrastructure systems. These policy instruments are also needed to adapting over time. Such a dynamic network evolution can be studied by
address challenges affecting infrastructure systems such as demographic comparing consecutive STNs at different points in time, but data gath-
change, rapidly growing urban areas, and climate change mitigation. ering and analysis would again add complexity to such an endeavor.
6. Conclusions Credit author
Socio-technical networks of networked infrastructure systems, as Liliane Manny: Conceptualization; Data curation; Formal analysis;
presented in this article, are of theoretical, conceptual, empirical, and Methodology; Software; Visualization; Writing - original draft; Writing -
11
L. Manny et al. J o u r n a l o f E n v i r o n m e n t a l M a n a g e m e n t 318(2022)115596
Guerrero, A.M., Bodin, O¨ ., McAllister, R.R.J., Wilson, K.A., 2015. Achieving social- processes. J. Environ. Manag. 125, 134–148. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ecological fit through bottom-up collaborative governance: an empirical jenvman.2013.03.052.
investigation. Ecol. Soc. 20 (4). Lomi, A., Robins, G., Tranmer, M., 2016. Introduction to multilevel social networks. Soc.
Guy, S., Marvin, S., Medd, W., Moss, T., 2011. Shaping Urban Infrastructures: Network. 44, 266–268. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socnet.2015.10.006.
Intermediaries and the Governance of Socio-Technical Networks. Earthscan, New Luís-Manso, P., 2005. Water Institutions and Management in Switzerland. CDM Working
York. Papers Series. EPFL, Lausanne.
Halfawy, M.R., 2008. Integration of municipal infrastructure asset management Manny, L., Duygan, M., Fischer, M., Rieckermann, J., 2021. Barriers to the digital
processes: challenges and solutions. J. Comput. Civ. Eng. 22 (3), 216–229. https:// transformation of infrastructure sectors. Pol. Sci. 54 (4), 943–983. https://doi.org/
doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)0887-3801 (2008)22:3(216). 10.1007/s11077-021-09438-y.
Hamiche, A.M., Stambouli, A.B., Flazi, S., 2016. A review of the water-energy nexus. Manny, L., Fischer, M., Rieckermann, J., 2018. Policy analysis for better protection of
Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 65, 319–331. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. receiving waters during wet weather. In: 11th International Conference on Urban
rser.2016.07.020. Drainage Modelling (UDM 2018). Palermo, Italy.
Hansman, R.J., Magee, C., De Neufville, R., Robins, R., Roos, D., 2006. Research agenda Mao, F., Khamis, K., Clark, J., Krause, S., Buytaert, W., Ochoa-Tocachi, B.F., et al., 2020.
for an integrated approach to infrastructure planning, design and management. Int. Moving beyond the technology: a socio-technical roadmap for low-cost water sensor
J. Crit. Infrastruct. 2 (2–3), 146–159. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJCIS.2006.009434. network applications. Environ. Sci. Technol. 54 (15), 9145–9158. https://doi.org/
Haythornthwaite, K., 1996. Social network analysis an approach and technique for the 10.1021/acs.est.9b07125.
study of information exchange. LISR 18, 323–343. Marchant, G.E., Abbott, K.W., Allenby, B., 2013. Innovative Governance Models for
Heiberg, J., Truffer, B., Binz, C., 2022. Assessing transitions through socio-technical Emerging Technologies. Edward Elgar Publishing Limited.
configuration analysis – a methodological framework and a case study in the water Markolf, S.A., Chester, M.V., Eisenberg, D.A., Iwaniec, D.M., Davidson, C.I.,
sector. Res. Pol. 51 (1), 104363 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2021.104363. Zimmerman, R., et al., 2018. Interdependent infrastructure as linked social,
Herzog, L.M., Ingold, K., 2019. Threats to common-pool resources and the importance of ecological, and technological systems (SETSs) to address lock-in and enhance
forums: on the emergence of cooperation in CPR problem settings. Pol. Stud. J. 47 resilience. Earth’s Future 6 (12), 1638–1659. https://doi.org/10.1029/
(1), 77–113. https://doi.org/10.1111/psj.12308. 2018ef000926.
Hodson, M., Marvin, S., 2010. Can cities shape socio-technical transitions and how would Mergel, I., Edelmann, N., Haug, N., 2019. Defining digital transformation: results from
we know if they were? Res. Pol. 39 (4), 477–485. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. expert interviews. Govern. Inf. Q. 36 (4) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2019.06.002.
respol.2010.01.020. Metz, F., Leifeld, P., Ingold, K., 2019. Interdependent policy instrument preferences: a
Hoolohan, C., Amankwaa, G., Browne, A.L., Clear, A., Holstead, K., Machen, R., et al., two-mode network approach. J. Publ. Pol. 39 (4), 609–636. https://doi.org/
2021. Resocializing digital water transformations: outlining social science 10.1017/S0143814X18000181.
perspectives on the digital water journey. WIREs Water. https://doi.org/10.1002/ Moglia, M., Alexander, K.S., Sharma, A., 2011. Discussion of the enabling environments
wat2.1512. for decentralised water systems. Water Sci. Technol. 63 (10), 2331–2339. https://
Hu, F., Mostashari, A., Xie, J., 2010. Socio-Technical Networks: Science and Engineering doi.org/10.2166/wst.2011.443.
Design. CRC Press, Inc. Mugisha, S., 2007. Performance assessment and monitoring of water infrastructure: an
Ingold, K., Fischer, M., 2016. Belief conflicts and coalition structures driving subnational empirical case study of benchmarking in Uganda. Water Pol. 9 (5), 475–491. https://
policy responses: the case of Swiss regulation of unconventional gas development. doi.org/10.2166/wp.2007.022.
In: Weible, C.M., Heikkila, T., Ingold, K., Fischer, M. (Eds.), Policy Debates on Ostrom, E., 2010. Polycentric systems for coping with collective action and global
Hydraulic Fracturing: Comparing Coalition Politics in North America and Europe. environmental change. Global Environ. Change 20 (4), 550–557.
Palgrave Macmillan US, New York, pp. 201–237. Oswald, M., Li, Q., McNeil, S., Trimbath, S., 2011. Measuring infrastructure performance:
Jensen, J.S., Fratini, C.F., Cashmore, M.A., 2015. Socio-technical systems as place- development of a national infrastructure index. Publ. Works Manag. Pol. 16 (4),
specific matters of concern: the role of urban governance in the transition of the 373–394. https://doi.org/10.1177/1087724x11410071.
wastewater system in Denmark. J. Environ. Pol. Plann. 18 (2), 234–252. https://doi. Ottens, M., Franssen, M., Kroes, P., Van De Poel, I., 2006. Modelling infrastructures as
org/10.1080/1523908x.2015.1074062. socio-technical systems. Int. J. Crit. Infrastruct. 2 (2–3), 133–145. https://doi.org/
Kerkez, B., Gruden, C., Lewis, M., Montestruque, L., Quigley, M., Wong, B., et al., 2016. 10.1504/IJCIS.2006.009433.
Smarter stormwater systems. Environ. Sci. Technol. 50 (14), 7267–7273. https:// Pan, F., Bi, W., Liu, X., Sigler, T., 2020. Exploring financial centre networks through
doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.5b05870. inter-urban collaboration in high-end financial transactions in China. Reg. Stud. 54
Kim, J.H., Keane, T.D., Bernard, E.A., 2015. Fragmented local governance and water (2), 162–172. https://doi.org/10.1080/00343404.2018.1475728.
resource management outcomes. J. Environ. Manag. 150, 378–386. https://doi.org/ Panebianco, S., Pahl-Wostl, C., 2006. Modelling socio-technical transformations in
10.1016/j.jenvman.2014.12.002. wastewater treatment—a methodological proposal. Technovation 26 (9),
Kiparsky, M., Sedlak, D.L., Thompson Jr., B.H., Truffer, B., 2013. The innovation deficit 1090–1100. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.technovation.2005.09.017.
in urban water: the need for an integrated perspective on institutions, organizations, Prager, S.D., Pfeifer, C., 2015. Network approaches for understanding rainwater
and technology. Environ. Eng. Sci. 30 (8), 395–408. https://doi.org/10.1089/ management from a social-ecological systems perspective. Ecol. Soc. 20 (4) https://
ees.2012.0427. doi.org/10.5751/ES-07950-200413.
Kling, R., McKim, G., King, A., 2003. A bit more to it scholarly communication forums as Prouty, C., Mohebbi, S., Zhang, Q., 2020. Extreme weather events and wastewater
socio-technical interaction networks. J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. Technol. 54 (1), 47–67. infrastructure: a system dynamics model of a multi-level, socio-technical transition.
Kluger, L.C., Gorris, P., Kochalski, S., Mueller, M.S., Romagnoni, G., Ban, N., 2020. Sci. Total Environ. 714, 136685 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.136685.
Studying human–nature relationships through a network lens: a systematic review. Roelich, K., Knoeri, C., Steinberger, J.K., Varga, L., Blythe, P.T., Butler, D., et al., 2015.
People Nat. https://doi.org/10.1002/pan3.10136. Towards resource-efficient and service-oriented integrated infrastructure operation.
Künneke, R., Groenewegen, J., M´enard, C., 2010. Aligning modes of organization with Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 92, 40–52. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
technology: critical transactions in the reform of infrastructures. J. Econ. Behav. techfore.2014.11.008.
Organ. 75 (3), 494–505. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jebo.2010.05.009. Saidi, S., Kattan, L., Jayasinghe, P., Hettiaratchi, P., Taron, J., 2018. Integrated
Lamb, R., Sawyer, S., Kling, R., 2000. A social informatics perspective on socio-technical infrastructure systems—a review. Sustain. Cities Soc. 36, 1–11. https://doi.org/
networks. AMCIS 2000 Proc. 10.1016/j.scs.2017.09.022.
Langeveld, J., Nopens, I., Schilperoort, R., Benedetti, L., de Klein, J., Amerlinck, Y., et al., Sayles, J.S., Mancilla Garcia, M., Hamilton, M., Alexander, S.M., Baggio, J.A., Fischer, A.
2013. On data requirements for calibration of integrated models for urban water P., et al., 2019. Social-ecological network analysis for sustainability sciences: a
systems. Water Sci. Technol. 68 (3), 728–736. https://doi.org/10.2166/ systematic review and innovative research agenda for the future. Environ. Res. Lett.
wst.2013.301. 14 (9) https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/ab2619.
Larsen, T.A., Hoffmann, S., Lüthi, C., Truffer, B., Maurer, M., 2016. Emerging solutions to Schoch, D., 2020. graphlayouts. -. R package version 0.7.1.
the water challenges of an urbanizing world. Science 352 (6288). https://doi.org/ Schweber, L., Harty, C., 2010. Actors and objects: a socio-technical networks approach to
10.1126/science.aad8641. technology uptake in the construction sector. Construct. Manag. Econ. 28 (6),
Leifeld, P., Schneider, V., 2012. Information exchange in policy networks. Am. J. Polit. 657–674. https://doi.org/10.1080/01446191003702468.
Sci. 56 (3), 731–744. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-5907.2011.00580.x. Scott, T.A., Ulibarri, N., 2019. Taking network analysis seriously: methodological
Levaggi, L., Levaggi, R., Trecroci, C., 2018. Decentralisation and waste flows: a welfare improvements for governance network scholarship. Perspect. Publ. Manag. Govern.
approach. J. Environ. Manag. 217, 969–979. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 2 (2), 89–101. https://doi.org/10.1093/ppmgov/gvy011.
jenvman.2018.03.067. Sherman, L., Cantor, A., Milman, A., Kiparsky, M., 2020. Examining the complex
Libralato, G., Volpi Ghirardini, A., Avezzù, F., 2012. To centralise or to decentralise: an relationship between innovation and regulation through a survey of wastewater
overview of the most recent trends in wastewater treatment management. utility managers. J. Environ. Manag. 260, 110025 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
J. Environ. Manag. 94 (1), 61–68. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2011.07.010. jenvman.2019.110025.
Lienert, J., Monstadt, J., Truffer, B., 2006. Future scenarios for a sustainable water Soutar, I., 2021. Dancing with complexity: making sense of decarbonisation,
sector: a case study from Switzerland. Environ. Sci. Technol. 40 (2), 436–442. decentralisation, digitalisation and democratisation. Energy Res. Social Sci. 80,
https://doi.org/10.1021/es0514139. 102230 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2021.102230.
Lienert, J., Schnetzer, F., Ingold, K., 2013. Stakeholder analysis combined with social
network analysis provides fine-grained insights into water infrastructure planning
13
L. Manny et al. J o u r n a l o f E n v i r o n m e n t a l M a n a g e m e n t 318(2022)115596
Thatcher, M., 2002. Regulation after delegation: independent regulatory agencies in Wihlborg, M., So¨rensen, J., Alkan Olsson, J., 2019. Assessment of barriers and drivers for
Europe. J. Eur. Publ. Pol. 9 (6), 954–972. https://doi.org/10.1080/ implementation of blue-green solutions in Swedish municipalities. J. Environ.
1350176022000046445. Manag. 233, 706–718. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2018.12.018.
Thorne, C.R., Lawson, E.C., Ozawa, C., Hamlin, S.L., Smith, L.A., 2018. Overcoming Wilbanks, T., Fernandez, S., 2012. Climate Change and Infrastructure, Urban Systems,
uncertainty and barriers to adoption of Blue-Green Infrastructure for urban flood risk and Vulnerabilities. Technical Report for the U.S. Department of Energy in Support of the
management. J. Flood Risk Manag. 11 (S2), S960–S972. https://doi.org/10.1111/ National Climate Assessment. Island Press, Washington DC.
jfr3.12218. Williams, R.A., 2018. Lessons learned on development and application of agent-based
Warneryd, M., Håkansson, M., Karltorp, K., 2020. Unpacking the complexity of models of complex dynamical systems. Simulat. Model. Pract. Theor. 83, 201–212.
community microgrids: a review of institutions’ roles for development of microgrids. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.simpat.2017.11.001.
Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 121, 109690 https://doi.org/10.1016/j. Worthington, A.C., 2014. A review of frontier approaches to efficiency and productivity
rser.2019.109690. measurement in urban water utilities. Urban Water J. 11 (1), 55–73. https://doi.org/
Wasserman, S., Faust, K., 1994. Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications. 10.1080/1573062X.2013.765488.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Zimmerman, R., Faris, C., 2010. Infrastructure impacts and adaptation challenges. Ann.
Weerasinghe, R.P.N.P., Yang, R.J., Too, E., Le, T., 2021. Renewable energy adoption in N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1196, 63–86.
the built environment: a sociotechnical network approach. Intell. Build. Int. 13 (1), Zimmerman, R., Horan, T., 2004. Digital Infrastructures: Enabling Civil and
33–50. https://doi.org/10.1080/17508975.2020.1752134. Environmental Systems through Information Technology. Routledge, London.
Whyte, J., Mijic, A., Myers, R.J., Angeloudis, P., Cardin, M.-A., Stettler, M.E.J., et al.,
2020. A research agenda on systems approaches to infrastructure. Civ. Eng. Environ.
Syst. 37 (4), 214–233. https://doi.org/10.1080/10286608.2020.1827396.
14

